J Innov Cardiac Rhythm Manage. 2026;17(1):6578–6590
INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES AND TECHNOLOGIES
DOI: 10.19102/icrm.2026.17011
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
REVIEW
Artificial Intelligence–driven Detection, 
Mapping, and Personalized Therapy for Atrial 
Fibrillation
DANIEL JOSEPH GONZALEZ, bs,1 SAMHITH KAMBAMPATI, bs,1 ERICK GODINEZ, bs,2  
ISHAN PARANJPE, md,1 KUSHAL CHATTERJEE, bs,1 RAHUL DEVATHU, ba,1 AARYAMAAN VERMA, bs,3 
EMMA SUN,1 CONNIE MA, bs,1 MUHAMMAD FAZAL, md,1 and TINA BAYKANER, md, mph1
1Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
2Department of Medicine, University of Nevada-Reno School of Medicine, Reno, NV, USA
3Department of Medicine, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
ABSTRACT. Atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common arrhythmia worldwide, affects approxi-
mately 59 million people globally. It poses a significant health burden by increasing morbidity and 
mortality. Artificial intelligence (AI) is emerging as a potentially transformative technology across 
the AF care continuum. This review synthesizes current evidence and critically evaluates AI 
applications in AF management, including innovations in detection and screening using electro-
cardiography and wearables; advanced mapping techniques using signal processing and com-
putational modeling to guide catheter ablation; machine learning-based prediction of treatment 
outcomes; and personalization of long-term therapy, such as anticoagulation. Key studies and 
trials illustrating AI’s capabilities in improving diagnostic yield, refining ablation targets, and 
enhancing prognostic accuracy are analyzed. The potential for AI to facilitate integrated care path-
ways, such as the “AF Better Care” approach, is considered, balancing innovation against clinical 
practicality, rigorous validation, and workflow integration. While AI shows considerable potential 
to augment precision in AF management, significant challenges concerning data generalizability, 
model interpretability, clinical utility validation, and equitable implementation remain. Opti-
mal integration requires careful alignment with clinical expertise and a focus on patient-centric 
outcomes. Addressing these challenges through collaborative efforts among clinicians, researchers, 
and technology developers will be essential to fully realize AI’s promise in improving AF care. 
Future research should prioritize robust validation, transparent methodologies, and practical 
implementation strategies to ensure that AI effectively enhances patient outcomes.
KEYWORDS. Artificial intelligence, atrial fibrillation, and catheter ablation.
ISSN 2156-3977 (print)
ISSN 2156-3993 (online)
CC BY 4.0 license
© 2026 Innovations in Cardiac 
Rhythm Management
Dr. Fazal reports research funds from the American Heart 
Association. Dr. Baykaner reports consulting fees from Medtronic, 
Biotronik, Boston Scientific, Abbott, PaceMate, Volta, iRhythm, 
and Johnson & Johnson and research funds from the US National 
Institutes of Health and Jannssen. The remaining authors report no 
conflicts of interest for the published content. No funding informa -
tion was provided.
Manuscript received June 23, 2025. Final version accepted October 
15, 2025.
Address correspondence to: Tina Baykaner, MD, MPH, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Drive, H2146, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA. Email: tina4@stanford.edu.
Introduction
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most prevalent sustained 
cardiac arrhythmia, affecting an estimated 59 million 
individuals worldwide in 2019, a figure projected to 
rise substantially with population aging and improved 
detection.1 AF significantly increases the risk of ischemic 
stroke, heart failure, cognitive impairment, and all-
cause mortality, while diminishing the quality of life. 2 
Effective management thus requires a comprehensive, 
6578 The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026
patient-centered strategy addressing disease screening, 
thromboembolism prevention, and symptom manage -
ment, along with the optimization of cardiovascular risk 
factors and comorbidities. Guidelines advocate for struc-
tured, integrated care models such as the AF Better Care 
(ABC) pathway. 2 However, translating guidelines into 
optimal real-world outcomes is challenged by AF’s com -
plexity, including its often paroxysmal and asymptomatic 
nature, the heterogeneity in underlying mechanisms and 
treatment responses, and challenges in integrating risk 
factor modification.3
Timely diagnosis and early intervention are critical in 
the management of AF. The Early Treatment of Atrial 
Fibrillation for Stroke Prevention Trial (EAST-AFNET 
4) demonstrated that initiating rhythm-control therapy 
within 1 year of AF diagnosis significantly improves car-
diovascular outcomes compared to delayed intervention 
or minimal rate-control strategies. 4 Ongoing research 
continues to investigate the optimal initial management 
strategy for AF. Recent trials, such as the Early Aggres -
sive Invasive Intervention for Atrial Fibrillation (EAR -
LY-AF) trial, have shown that first-line catheter ablation 
in treatment-naive patients may be safer and more effec -
tive compared to initial anti-arrhythmic drug (AAD) 
therapy.5 Similarly, the Cryoballoon Catheter Ablation in 
an Anti-arrhythmic Drug Naive Paroxysmal Atrial Fibril-
lation (STOP AF First) trial found that cryoballoon abla -
tion as an initial therapy was superior to AAD therapy for 
preventing atrial arrhythmia recurrence in patients with 
paroxysmal AF.6 Despite these advancements, optimizing 
care remains challenging due to diagnostic difficulties 
and incomplete understanding of AF pathophysiology, 
particularly in persistent AF, where complex interactions 
among triggers, drivers, and atrial substrates occur. 7,8 
These complexities contribute to the variable responses 
observed with AADs and catheter ablation therapies 
across the entire AF spectrum.3
Artificial intelligence (AI), including machine learning 
(ML) and deep learning, offers powerful computational 
tools to address these clinical challenges. 9–11 By analyz -
ing complex patterns within high-dimensional data from 
sources such as electrocardiograms (ECGs), wearable 
devices, medical imaging, and electronic health records 
(EHRs), AI algorithms can enhance diagnostic accuracy, 
tailor individualized treatment strategies, predict clinical 
outcomes, and optimize patient monitoring.9,12 However, 
the clinical integration of these advanced computational 
tools is not without its challenges. A critical, long-stand -
ing argument centers on the need for AI to be explainable; 
the so-called “black box” problem, where the reasoning 
behind a model’s output is unclear, can be a significant 
barrier to clinical trust and adoption. 13 This review crit -
ically appraises current and emerging AI applications 
across the AF management spectrum, from initial detec -
tion and risk stratification to treatment guidance and 
long-term monitoring. We evaluate the supporting evi -
dence, focusing on innovations poised to enhance diag -
nostic capabilities, personalize therapeutic strategies, 
and ultimately improve patient outcomes within the 
electrophysiology community. The foundational step in 
managing AF effectively is accurate and timely detection, 
a domain where AI is demonstrating significant poten -
tial to overcome the limitations of traditional screening 
methods.
Enhancing atrial fibrillation detection and 
screening with artificial intelligence
Early and accurate detection of AF is crucial for the 
timely initiation of guideline-directed therapies and 
stroke prevention.2 Traditional detection methods, such 
as opportunistic ECG screening, have limited sensitivity 
for intermittent AF episodes, while prolonged monitor -
ing approaches are constrained by cost and scalability 
challenges.3 AI is enabling novel detection strategies by 
enhancing clinical ECG interpretation and automating 
analysis of data from wearables.
Artificial intelligence–based electrocardiogram 
analysis: detecting undiagnosed or future atrial 
fibrillation from sinus rhythm electrocardiograms
A notable advancement leverages deep learning, specif -
ically convolutional neural networks (CNNs), to iden -
tify predisposition to AF from standard 12-lead ECGs 
recorded during sinus rhythm. CNNs are particularly 
well suited for this task due to their ability to automat -
ically learn hierarchical patterns and subtle morpho -
logical features within the ECG signal that may escape 
human interpretation and traditional signal processing 
tools. The underlying premise is that early or estab -
lished atrial cardiomyopathy, a common substrate for 
AF, imparts subtle but consistent electrocardiographic 
signatures during sinus rhythm that these complex algo -
rithms can detect.14 Foundational research by Attia et al. 
(2019) demonstrated the feasibility and effectiveness of 
this AI-enhanced ECG analysis, achieving high discrim -
inative performance (area under the curve [AUC] of 0.87 
from a single ECG, rising to 0.90 with multiple ECGs) in 
identifying patients with a documented history of par -
oxysmal AF based solely on sinus rhythm ECG data. 14 
This pivotal study established the standard 12-lead 
ECG as a viable tool for opportunistic AF screening. In 
the near-term, this could translate into automated flags 
within EHR systems, alerting clinicians to patients who 
may warrant extended cardiac monitoring based on 
routine ECGs. In the medium term, we anticipate that 
this AI-guided approach could be integrated into formal 
screening guidelines for at-risk populations, fundamen -
tally changing how we proactively identify individuals 
with undiagnosed AF.
The prospective clinical utility was investigated in a 
targeted screening trial. 15 In this study, an AI-based 
ECG algorithm stratified older adults (aged ≥65 years) 
with stroke risk factors, after which subsequent contin -
uous monitoring identified AF significantly more fre -
quently in individuals classified as high risk by AI (7.6%)  
compared to those classified as low risk (1.6%; P < .001). 
AI-driven Detection, Mapping, and Personalized Therapy for AF
The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026 6579

This AI-guided strategy screening approach improved 
AF detection rates compared to usual care, demonstrating 
its potential to optimize resource allocation for rhythm 
monitoring. Moreover, the use of AI-driven  analysis 
has recently expanded to single-lead ECG recordings. 
Hygrell et  al. (2023) reported a reasonable predictive 
accuracy (AUC, 0.80) for identifying paroxysmal AF from 
single-lead sinus rhythm ECGs in an age-diverse popula-
tion.16 However, performance varied considerably among 
more homogenous age subgroups (AUC, 0.62), highlight-
ing how population characteristics can influence the gen-
eralizability of predictive models.
Wearable sensors and artificial intelligence algo-
rithms: scaling atrial fibrillation monitoring
Consumer smartwatches and fitness trackers, equipped 
with photoplethysmography (PPG) sensors, are enabling 
large-scale, long-term, passive rhythm monitoring and 
significantly expanding AF screening capabilities. 2 Early 
landmark decentralized studies, such as the Apple Heart 
Study and the Huawei Heart Study, used proprietary 
irregular pulse–detection algorithms integrated within 
smartwatches.17,18 These studies demonstrated the feasi -
bility of mass screening via wearables, identifying many 
individuals with previously unknown AF, often with 
high positive predictive values (PPVs) for algorithm-trig-
gered notifications (PPV , 84% in the Apple Heart Study 
for ECG patch confirmation following alert; PPV , 92% in 
the Huawei Heart Study).17,18
The evolution of this technology has rapidly moved 
toward incorporating sophisticated AI and ML directly 
into the analysis of these PPG signals. For instance, sub -
sequent research from the Huawei Heart Study detailed 
the development and validation of a specific ML-based 
model (using eXtreme Gradient Boosting) for the real-
time prediction of AF onset from PPG data. This ML 
model showed good predictive ability, achieving an AUC 
of 0.94 for AF onset within 4 h when prospectively vali -
dated against 72-h Holter ECG monitoring in a high-risk 
population.19 This work illustrates a direct application of 
ML to PPG signals for proactive AF risk assessment, mov-
ing beyond simple irregular pulse detection.
Robust algorithms are emerging to address the inherent 
challenges of real-world PPG signal quality, which can 
be degraded by motion artifacts and noise. Ballinger 
et  al. (2018) introduced DeepHeart, a semi-supervised 
deep learning model (long short-term memory), which 
analyzed PPG and activity data from wearables to pre -
dict a range of cardiovascular risk factors and related 
conditions.20 Their AI model showed a high accuracy 
in detecting various medical conditions and achieved 
AUCs of 0.85 (diabetes), 0.74 (high cholesterol), 0.81 
(high blood pressure), and 0.83 (sleep apnea). 20 Follow-
ing this, Tison et  al. (2018) demonstrated a deep neu -
ral network for passive AF detection using smartwatch 
PPG data, achieving a high AUC of 0.97 against phy -
sician-interpreted 12-lead ECGs in a controlled cohort 
of patients undergoing cardioversion. 21 Crucially, the 
authors also reported that the AUC was substantially 
lower at 0.72 in ambulatory patients, highlighting 
how real-world conditions can impact performance 
and underscoring the potential for model overfitting. 21 
These studies highlighted the early potential of AI in 
leveraging consumer wearable data for AF detection 
and broader health insights. More recently, Vo et  al. 
(2024) proposed an attention-based deep state space 
model specifically designed to translate noisy PPG sig -
nals into corresponding ECG waveforms. 22 Their AI 
model, engineered for noise robustness and data effi -
ciency, achieved a high area under the precision–recall 
curve of 0.99 for AF detection when the translated ECGs 
were processed by an existing AF detector. Though 
this remains experimental and requires further clinical 
validation, it showcases AI’s advancing capabilities in 
enhancing signal quality and the diagnostic utility of 
PPG data. 22 A near-term implication is the potential for 
backend integration of such technology to reduce the 
high rate of “inconclusive readings” from current con -
sumer devices, thereby improving their reliability. In 
the medium term, this could enable certain wearables 
to function as near-diagnostic tools, providing high-  
fidelity rhythm analysis that could streamline the path 
to definitive diagnosis and treatment.
The regulatory landscape for these technologies is also 
maturing. As of early 2023, several direct-to-consumer 
wearable smart devices have received clearance for 
AF detection, including the Apple Watch (Series 6 and 
later; Apple, Inc., Cupertino, CA, USA), Samsung Gal -
axy Watch (3 and later; Samsung Group, Seoul, Korea), 
Withings ScanWatch (Withings, Issy-les-Moulineaux, 
France), and Fitbit Sense (Fitbit, Inc., San Francisco, CA, 
USA), alongside ECG-specific devices such as the Kardi -
aMobile (AliveCor, Mountain View, CA, USA). A clinical 
validation study by Mannhart et al. (2023) assessed five 
such smart devices. While sensitivities and specificities 
for automated AF detection were generally comparable 
when conclusive readings were obtained, the study high-
lighted that a significant proportion of tracings, ranging 
from 17%–26% depending on the device, were deemed 
inconclusive by the devices’ embedded algorithms.23 This 
finding underscores the ongoing need for algorithmic 
improvements, potentially through more advanced AI, to 
reduce inconclusive readings and enhance reliability in 
real-world scenarios, even as a manual review of these 
inconclusive tracings by cardiologists proved highly 
accurate.23
Implications for screening strategies
AI-enhanced ECG analysis may enable opportunistic risk 
stratification within existing clinical workflows, facil -
itating targeted deployment of diagnostic resources. 15 
Concurrently, AI-driven analysis of wearable PPG sen -
sor data offers unprecedented scalability for long-term 
population surveillance and even prediction of AF 
onset.19,22 Optimal screening strategies in the future will 
D. J. Gonzalez, S. Kambampati, E. Godinez, et al.
6580 The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026
likely involve synergistic application of these technolo -
gies: AI ECG analysis could identify high-risk individ -
uals during routine clinical encounters, who could then 
be directed toward targeted long-term monitoring using 
wearables or clinical-grade devices. The Prediction 
of Undiagnosed Atrial Fibrillation Using a Machine 
Learning Algorithm (PULsE-AI) trial, for example, used 
an ML risk-prediction algorithm based on primary care 
EHRs (not directly on PPG) to identify individuals at 
high risk of undiagnosed AF. These individuals were 
then offered diagnostic testing, which included ECG-
based KardiaMobile monitoring. 24 Although the pri -
mary ML algorithm in PULsE-AI was not PPG-based, 
its study design points toward pathways where AI iden -
tifies at-risk cohorts for whom wearable monitoring, 
potentially including AI-enhanced PPG devices, could 
be beneficial.
Realizing this potential requires overcoming significant 
implementation hurdles, including rigorous validation 
of algorithms across diverse populations, development 
of efficient clinical pathways for diagnostic confirma -
tion and management initiation, careful consideration of 
potential harms such as overdiagnosis and patient anx -
iety, and robust demonstration of cost-effectiveness. 2,3 
Key studies employing advanced AI for AF detection and 
screening are summarized in Table 1.
Artificial intelligence–enhanced risk  
stratification for stroke and atrial fibrillation 
progression
Beyond initial detection, accurate patient risk stratifica -
tion is paramount for guiding preventative therapies, 
particularly for thromboembolic complications such as 
stroke. While established clinical scores such as CHA2DS2-
VASc provide essential population-level guidance, their 
poor predictive accuracy at the individual patient level 
limits personalized decision-making. 25 AI and ML mod -
els offer a pathway to more granular risk assessment by 
integrating high-dimensional data encompassing clinical 
variables, genomic data, biomarkers, and quantitative 
metrics derived from imaging modalities. 26 ML analy -
ses applied to large-scale EHR data have demonstrated 
potential to outperform standard risk scores in predict -
ing thromboembolic events, although performance var -
iability and the need for external validation remain key 
considerations.10,11
AI is also poised to play a vital role in navigating the 
complexities of subclinical AF, often manifesting as 
atrial high-rate episodes (AHREs) detected by cardiac 
implantable electronic devices. Device-detected AF cre -
ates significant clinical uncertainty regarding the initia -
tion of anticoagulation therapy, as the balance of benefit 
and harm differs from that in clinically apparent AF. 27 
A meta-analysis of two recent randomized trials (Non-  
Vitamin K Antagonist Oral Anticoagulants in Patients 
With Atrial High Rate Episodes [NOAH-AFNET 6] and 
Apixaban for the Reduction of Thrombo-embolism in 
Patients with Device-Detected Subclinical Atrial Fibril -
lation [ARTESIA]) demonstrated that, while direct oral 
anticoagulants led to a 32% relative reduction in ischemic 
stroke, this occurred in the context of a low absolute 
stroke risk (~1.0% per year in the control arms) and at the 
cost of a 62% relative increase in major bleeding, high -
lighting persistent clinical equipoise. 27
Therefore, AI analysis integrating detailed device data 
with comprehensive clinical factors may enable identi -
fication of the specific AHRE patient subset most likely 
to derive net clinical benefit from oral anticoagulation 
(OAC).27 Moreover, AI-driven patient phenotyping 
through unsupervised ML methods, such as clustering 
algorithms applied to detailed clinical and imaging data-
sets, can uncover distinct subgroups within the broader 
AF population. This approach has the potential to refine 
stroke risk stratification for both clinically evident and 
subclinical AF by elucidating previously unrecognized 
patient heterogeneity relevant to clinical outcomes. 28 
Near-term, these AI-defined phenotypes may help clini -
cians identify candidates for more aggressive risk factor 
modification or earlier intervention. Looking forward 
3–5 years, this could evolve into validated, dynamic risk- 
stratification tools that supersede current static scores, 
allowing for more precise, personalized anticoagulation 
and treatment decisions.
Optimizing OAC requires a careful balance between 
thromboembolic prevention and mitigating bleeding 
risk.2 As previously noted, established clinical risk scores 
possess limited predictive capacity at the individual 
level.25 ML algorithms integrating broader, longitudinal 
data from EHRs, potentially including genomic or bio -
marker data, may offer more precise and dynamic pre -
dictions of both ischemic and bleeding events. This could 
refine OAC decision-making, particularly for patients 
with intermediate risk scores; inform choices between 
OAC and left atrial (LA) appendage closure; or guide 
management in challenging scenarios such as subclinical 
AF.25–27
Artificial intelligence in atrial fibrillation 
ablation: enhancing mapping, guidance, and 
outcome prediction
Catheter ablation, primarily centered on pulmonary 
vein isolation (PVI), is an established effective therapy 
for paroxysmal AF. However, its success rates are con -
siderably lower for persistent and long-standing persis -
tent AF, likely attributable to complex extra-pulmonary 
vein arrhythmogenic mechanisms and progressive atrial 
substrate remodeling. 2,7,8 Conventional electroanatomic 
mapping techniques often struggle to reliably character -
ize these patient-specific mechanisms or the underlying 
substrate alterations.29 AI can interpret and integrate the 
complex electrical and structural patterns underlying 
fibrillatory conduction, enabling mechanism-targeted, 
AI-driven Detection, Mapping, and Personalized Therapy for AF
The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026 6581

Table 1: Selected Studies Employing Advanced AI for AF Detection and Screening
Study Population/n AI Input/Method Key AI Contribution/
Insight
Performance/Outcome 
Metric(s)
Clinical Implication(s)/Limitation(s)
AI-enhanced detection using ECGs
  Attia et al. 
(2019)14
180,922 patients 12-lead ECG (sinus 
rhythm)/CNN
Identifies a latent electro-
cardiographic signature 
of AF in patients during 
normal sinus rhythm
• Single ECG: AUC, 0.87
• Multiple ECGs: AUC, 0.90
•  Implication: Enables opportunistic AF risk 
screening using routine, existing 12-lead ECGs
•  Limitation: Retrospective, single-center 
design requires prospective validation for 
screening utility
  Hygrell et al. 
(2023)16
14,831 patients 
(≥65 years old) from 
three screening 
studies
Single-lead ECG 
(sinus rhythm)/CNN
Extends the AI ECG concept 
of identifying latent AF 
signatures from a 12-lead to 
a single-lead ECG format
•  For predicting paroxysmal AF 
in age-diverse cohorts: AUC, 
0.80
•  For predicting paroxysmal AF 
in age-homogenous cohorts: 
AUC, 0.62
•  Implication: Shows potential for simpler, 
more accessible single-lead ECG-based AF 
risk screening
•  Limitation: Performance is significantly 
influenced by the age diversity of the pop-
ulation
AI-powered detection and prediction using wearable sensors
  Guo et al. 
(2021)19 (Huawei 
Heart Study)
554 individuals with 
AF (development) + 
50 high-risk patients 
(validation)
PPG signals/XGBoost 
ML model
Predicts the onset of AF in 
real time (0–4 h prior) using 
continuously monitored 
PPG signals
For AF onset prediction within 4 
h: AUC, 0.94
•  Implication: Offers a proactive, predictive 
AF risk assessment that moves beyond sim-
ple detection
•  Limitations: Validated in a high-risk popula-
tion; requires continuous PPG monitoring
  Ballinger 
et al. (2018)20 
(DeepHeart)
14,011 patients 
(57,675 per-
son-weeks of data 
from wearable 
sensor users)
Wearable PPG 
and activity data/
semi-supervised 
LSTM network
Predicts multiple cardiovas-
cular risk factors and related 
conditions using passive 
wearable sensor data
AUCs for predicting various 
conditions:
• Diabetes: 0.85
• High cholesterol: 0.74
• Sleep apnea: 0.83
• Hypertension: 0.81
•  Implication: Demonstrates the potential for 
wearables in comprehensive cardiovascular 
risk stratification beyond AF
•  Limitations: Retrospective analysis; condition 
labels were based on user self-reporting
  Tison et al. 
(2018)21
51 patients (cardi-
oversion cohort) + 
9750 participants 
(validation cohort)
Smartwatch PPG 
and step count/DNN
Validates passive AF 
detection accuracy of a 
smartwatch PPG-based DNN 
against 12-lead ECGs
•  Cardioversion cohort: AUC, 
0.97
•  Ambulatory patients: AUC, 
0.72
• I mplication: Establishes high technical accu-
racy of PPG-based AI in controlled settings
•  Limitations: Real-world performance is 
reduced by noise and motion artifacts; ECG 
confirmation is often required
 Vo et al. (2024)22 55 patients from 
the MIMIC-III data-
base
PPG signals/ADSSM Translates noisy PPG signals 
into ECG waveforms to 
leverage more advanced 
ECG-based AF detectors
For AF detection when using 
the translated ECG signals: 
PR-AUC, 0.99
•  Implication: May improve the diagnostic 
utility of PPG data, especially when signals 
are noisy
•  Limitations: Small sample size; translation 
accuracy requires broader validation
AI-guided population screening strategies
  Noseworthy et al. 
(2022)15
1003 patients 12-lead ECG (sinus 
rhythm)/CNN algo-
rithm
Tests the clinical utility of an 
AI ECG algorithm to guide a 
targeted AF screening  
strategy in a prospective 
trial
AF detection yield: 7.6% in 
AI-high-risk group vs. 1.6% in 
AI-low-risk group after continu-
ous monitoring
•  Implication: Demonstrates that AI-guided 
screening can enrich the target population 
and optimize monitoring resources
•  Limitations: Non-randomized design; the 
primary outcome was AF detection, not 
clinical events
D. J. Gonzalez, S. Kambampati, E. Godinez, et al.
6582 The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026
personalized approaches to strategies that extend beyond 
PVI.
Artificial intelligence–enhanced  
electrophysiological mapping
AI algorithms are being developed to analyze complex 
intracardiac electrograms (EGMs) automatically, aiming 
to identify regions critical for AF initiation or perpetua -
tion. ML techniques, particularly deep learning architec -
tures such as CNNs, can automate the classification of 
complex EGM features and standardize the interpretation 
of AF-activation patterns in persistent AF. 30 However, 
because these sophisticated models can function as “black 
boxes,” their clinical acceptance hinges on transparency. 
To address this directly, explainable AI (XAI) methods are 
now being used to provide clinicians with clear insights 
into the features and rationale underlying these classifi -
cations, moving beyond a simple prediction to offer a jus-
tification for the algorithm’s conclusions. 30 Additionally, 
ML approaches analyzing frequency-domain character -
istics of EGMs, such as dominant frequency and organi -
zation indices derived from Fourier spectra, have shown 
promising results when validated against high-resolution 
optical mapping of ex vivo human hearts, potentially sur-
passing traditional spectral analysis methods in detecting 
AF drivers.31
Emerging AI-driven mapping systems aim to transform 
EGM pattern recognition directly into actionable ablation 
targets. For example, AI analyses that measure spatio -
temporal dispersion within EGMs can identify areas of 
highly disorganized conduction, hypothesized to reflect 
proximity to critical AF drivers. 32 This approach was 
prospectively evaluated in the randomized Tailored vs. 
Anatomical Ablation Strategy for Persistent Atrial Fibril-
lation (TAILORED-AF) trial, demonstrating that ablation 
of AI-identified dispersion zones, in addition to standard 
PVI, significantly improved 12-month freedom from AF 
compared to PVI alone (89% vs. 67%, P < .001) in patients 
with persistent AF.33 The near-term implication for prac -
tice is the potential for wider adoption of this specific 
AI-guided strategy in electrophysiology laboratories for 
ablation of persistent AF cases, acquiring broader intrap-
rocedural and follow-up data for AI model training, and 
improving the algorithm’s accuracy for achieving proce -
dural efficiency and acute endpoints. Over the medium 
term, this success could establish a new standard of care 
for substrate modification in persistent AF, contingent on 
long-term data and broader availability of the technology.
Computational modeling for personalized ablation 
planning
An alternative, in silico approach involves creating 
patient-specific computational models of the atria, typ -
ically based on high-resolution imaging such as late 
gadolinium enhancement magnetic resonance imaging 
(LGE-MRI), which delineates both atrial anatomy and 
fibrosis distribution. By incorporating detailed math -
ematical representations of atrial electrophysiology, 
Study Population/n AI Input/Method Key AI Contribution/
Insight
Performance/Outcome 
Metric(s)
Clinical Implication(s)/Limitation(s)
  Hill et al. (2022)24 
(PULsE-AI)
23,745 primary care 
participants (≥30 
years)
EHR data/ML 
risk-prediction 
algorithm
Identifies individuals at 
high risk of undiagnosed AF 
using an EHR-based algo-
rithm for targeted diagnos-
tic testing
Among high-risk participants 
who underwent testing: 9.41% 
received an AF diagnosis vs. 
4.93% in the high-risk control 
arm
•  Implication: EHR-based ML can effectively 
identify high-risk cohorts for targeted AF 
screening
•  Limitation: Low uptake of diagnostic testing 
(28.1% of those invited) limited the overall 
impact
Abbreviations: ADSSM, attention-based deep state space model; AF, atrial fibrillation; AI, artificial intelligence; AUC, area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve; CNN, convolutional neural network; DNN, deep neural network; ECG, electrocardiogram; EHR, electronic health record; LSTM, long short-term memory; ML, 
machine learning; PPG, photoplethysmography; PR-AUC, precision–recall area under curve; XGBoost, eXtreme Gradient Boosting.
Table 1: (continued)
AI-driven Detection, Mapping, and Personalized Therapy for AF
The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026 6583

including conduction velocity, refractoriness, and 
fibrosis-driven tissue heterogeneity, these models can 
non-invasively simulate AF dynamics. 34 The princi -
pal objective is to identify patient-specific mechanisms 
responsible for AF maintenance, particularly re-entrant 
driver locations linked to fibrotic substrates, thereby 
facilitating precise, individualized ablation target selec -
tion before the clinical procedure. The Optimal Target 
Identification via Modelling of Arrhythmogenesis 
(OPTIMA) strategy demonstrated the practical feasibil -
ity of using such computational simulations to detect 
existing as well as emergent AF drivers associated with 
fibrosis distribution, enabling formulation of a com -
prehensive, patient-tailored ablation plan in advance. 34 
Although computationally demanding, this strategy 
holds considerable promise for non-invasive, mecha -
nistically guided ablation planning. Furthermore, inte -
grating simulation-derived functional parameters into 
ML frameworks has shown potential for predicting AF 
recurrence post-ablation, underscoring that computa -
tional modeling effectively captures clinically relevant 
aspects of the atrial substrate. 7
Artificial intelligence for predicting ablation  
outcomes
Accurate prediction of catheter ablation success is 
essential for effective patient selection, expectation 
management, and tailoring individualized therapeutic 
strategies.9,35 ML models are demonstrating significant 
potential to improve prognostication by integrating 
diverse, high-dimensional data sources beyond tradi -
tional clinical risk factors. Multimodal AI models, which 
incorporate various data sources, including intracardiac 
EGMs collected during ablation, pre-procedural sur -
face ECGs, clinical variables, raw imaging studies, and 
imaging-derived metrics, consistently outperform sim -
pler clinical scoring systems in predicting AF recurrence 
post-ablation.35,36 For example, Tang et al. (2022) demon -
strated that a deep learning fusion model combining int -
racardiac EGMs, ECGs, and clinical parameters yielded 
superior accuracy (AUC, 0.86) for predicting 1-year AF 
recurrence compared to single-modality models or clini -
cal scores alone.35 Similarly, Razeghi et al. (2023) reported 
robust predictive performance (AUC, 0.82) by integrating 
clinical data with morphological and deep learning–de -
rived features extracted from pre-ablation cardiac com -
puted tomography (CT) images.36 Further demonstrating 
the power of data fusion, Roney et al. (2022) showed that 
combining patient history and imaging data with met -
rics from biophysical in silico simulations significantly 
improved the prediction of long-term AF recurrence 
(AUC, 0.85) compared to models using clinical and imag-
ing data alone (AUC, 0.66). 37 Novel imaging biomark -
ers further contribute to predictive accuracy; Firouznia 
et  al. (2021) illustrated that CT-derived fractal features 
assessing LA shape and texture complexity substan -
tially improved recurrence prediction (AUC, 0.87 when 
combined with clinical data) compared to LA volume 
alone (AUC, 0.59). 38 Collectively, the near-term implica -
tion of these advanced multimodal models is their use 
as powerful adjunctive tools in shared decision-making, 
enabling more personalized discussions about the likeli -
hood of ablation success. In the medium term (3–5 years), 
as these analytics undergo prospective validation and 
integration into clinical platforms, they could directly 
guide patient selection for ablation and help tailor pro -
cedural strategies to individual substrate characteristics.
Quantitative fibrosis assessment derived from LGE-
MRI has proven especially valuable as input data for 
predictive models. By incorporating fibrosis informa -
tion into personalized computational models, research -
ers can functionally assess atrial substrates. Shade et al. 
(2020) demonstrated that features derived from in silico 
simulations of AF inducibility based on pre-ablation 
LGE-MRI were highly predictive of recurrence after 
PVI for paroxysmal AF (validation AUC, 0.82). 7 Fur -
thermore, unsupervised ML techniques such as clus -
tering, when applied to clinical and LGE-MRI fibrosis 
data from the Efficacy of Delayed Enhancement MRI-
Guided Ablation vs. Conventional Catheter Ablation of 
Atrial Fibrillation (DECAAF II) trial, identified distinct 
phenotypes within persistent AF patients. Specifically, 
a high-risk phenotype, characterized by older age, 
higher body mass index, increased LA volume, and 
greater fibrosis burden, showed significantly elevated 
recurrence rates post-ablation (51.7% vs. 35.0%), high -
lighting ML’s capability to reveal clinically relevant 
patient heterogeneity. 28 Atrial structural characteristics 
also influence other outcomes, such as the likelihood 
of functional mitral regurgitation resolution following 
successful AF ablation. 39
Collectively, ML models represent a significant advance 
in predicting AF ablation outcomes. By integrating com -
plex multimodal data, they offer more accurate, person -
alized risk stratification, facilitating improved patient 
selection, enhancing shared decision-making, managing 
expectations, and potentially paving the way for per -
sonalized ablation strategies. 28,35,36 Widespread clini -
cal adoption requires further validation, particularly in 
 prospective settings, and demonstration of clinical utility 
beyond predictive accuracy. Selected studies highlighting 
these AI applications in AF treatment guidance and out -
come prediction are presented in Table 2.
Artificial intelligence in therapy monitoring 
and personalization
Effective long-term AF management necessitates contin -
uous surveillance, dynamic risk factor modification, and 
therapy adjustments, ideally within an integrated care 
framework.2,3 AI presents opportunities to enhance the 
efficiency, personalization, and proactivity of this chronic 
care phase.9,11
D. J. Gonzalez, S. Kambampati, E. Godinez, et al.
6584 The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026
Table 2: Selected Studies on AI for AF Ablation Guidance and Outcome Prediction
Study Population/n AI Input/Method Key AI Contribution/
Insight
Performance/Outcome 
Metric(s)
Clinical Implication(s)/Limitation(s)
Imaging-based and predictive AI applications
  Shade et al. 
(2020)7
32 patients (parox-
ysmal AF)
LGE-MRI + computa-
tional modeling (AF 
inducibility simulation)/
ML classifier
Predicts recurrence risk by 
integrating mechanistic 
simulation results with an 
ML model
In silico simulation 
features were highly 
predictive of post-PVI 
recurrence (validation 
AUC, 0.82)
•  Implication: Proof of concept for using func-
tional substrate assessment via simulation for 
prognosis
•  Limitation: Small, retrospective study focused 
on paroxysmal AF
  Noujaim et al. 
(2025)28 (DECAAF 
II)
815 patients 
(persistent AF from 
DECAAF II trial)
Clinical + LGE-MRI 
fibrosis data/unsuper-
vised ML clustering 
(GBM)
Identifies distinct patient 
phenotypes within persis-
tent AF based on clinical 
and imaging data
High-risk phenotypes 
(older, high BMI/LA vol/
fibrosis) had significantly 
higher recurrence rates 
post-ablation of 51.7% 
vs. 35.0% (AUC, 0.87)
•  Implication: Unsupervised ML can reveal clin-
ically relevant patient heterogeneity that is 
linked to prognosis
• Limitation: Post-hoc analysis of RCT data
  Boyle et al. 
(2019)34 (OPTIMA)
10 patients (persis-
tent AF)
LGE-MRI + computa-
tional modeling
Predicts personalized abla-
tion targets in silico based 
on patient-specific fibrosis 
substrate
Feasibility of pre-pro-
cedural computational 
target identification was 
demonstrated
•  Implication: Potential for non-invasive, mecha-
nism-based ablation planning
•  Limitations: Small feasibility study; computa-
tionally intensive; clinical outcome impact not 
yet proven in an RCT
  Razeghi et al. 
(2023)36
321 patients (mixed 
AF)
Cardiac CT (morpholog-
ical + deep features) + 
clinical data/ML fusion 
framework
Predicts recurrence using 
a multimodal ML model 
that fuses imaging and 
clinical features
Fusion model (AUC, 0.82) 
was superior to a model 
using clinical data alone 
(AUC, 0.63)
•  Implication: Demonstrates the value of deep 
learning features from standard CT scans for 
prognostication
•  Limitations: Retrospective design; requires 
external validation
  Roney et al. 
(2022)37
100 patients (mixed 
AF)
MRI, clinical data + 
biophysical simulation 
metrics/ML classifier 
(SVM)
Fuses clinical data with 
patient-specific simulation 
“stress tests” to improve 
prediction of long-term 
recurrence
Combined model (AUC, 
0.85) significantly outper-
formed clinical/imaging 
model alone (AUC, 0.66)
•  Implication: Demonstrates that integrating  
functional data from simulations can substantially 
boost predictive accuracy
•  Limitations: Requires significant computational 
resources; prospective validation needed
  Firouznia et al. 
(2021)38
203 patients (mixed 
AF)
Cardiac CT (fractal 
features) + clinical data/
random forest classifier
Predicts recurrence using 
novel CT-derived fractal 
features of LA shape and 
texture
Combination model 
achieved superior predic-
tion (AUC, 0.87) com-
pared to LA volume alone 
(AUC, 0.59)
•  Implication: Highlights predictive value of  
quantitative LA morphology beyond simple 
volumetric measurement
•  Limitations: Retrospective analysis; fractal feature 
extraction can be complex
  Bautista et al. 
(2023)39
50 patients (AF with 
moderate-severe 
functional MR)
Post-ablation 3D  
voltage mapping/ 
analysis of low-voltage 
zones (scars)
Predicts a non-arrhythmic 
outcome (MR resolution) 
based on atrial substrate 
characteristics
Presence of a posterior 
bottom LA scar was an 
independent predictor 
of refractory MR after AF 
ablation
•  Implication: Suggests that atrial substrate 
remodeling impacts mechanical function recov-
ery, not just rhythm outcome
• Limitation: Small, retrospective study
Intraprocedural signal analysis AI applications
  Reddy et al. 
(2024)8 (FLOW-AF)
85 patients (redo 
non-paroxysmal AF)
Intracardiac EGM  
(electrographic flow)/
EGF mapping algorithm
Guides source ablation by 
targeting AI-reconstructed 
activation sources (EGF) in 
a prospective RCT
EGF-guided ablation 
+ PVI was superior to 
PVI alone for 12-month 
AF-free survival (68% vs. 
17%)
•  Implication: RCT evidence supports AI-guided 
source ablation benefit in a challenging redo 
persistent AF population
•  Limitations: Smaller sample size; specific  
algorithm; focus on redo procedures
AI-driven Detection, Mapping, and Personalized Therapy for AF
The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026 6585

Study Population/n AI Input/Method Key AI Contribution/
Insight
Performance/Outcome 
Metric(s)
Clinical Implication(s)/Limitation(s)
  Alhusseini et al. 
(2020)30
35 patients  
(persistent AF)
Intracardiac EGM/CNN 
with explainable AI 
(XAI)
Classifies EGM patterns 
objectively using deep 
learning and provides 
explanations for the AI’s 
logic
High accuracy (95%) for 
classifying rotational vs. 
non-rotational activity
•  Implication: Potential for automated, objective 
EGM analysis with increased clinical trust via XAI
•  Limitations: Proof-of-concept design; small sam-
ple size; clinical utility not yet established
  Zolotarev et al. 
(2020)31
11 explanted 
human atria
Intracardiac EGM 
(Fourier spectra)/ML 
(various classifiers)
Identifies AF driver 
regions by analyzing 
EGM frequency features, 
validated against optical 
mapping
Higher-density catheter 
datasets had higher 
F1-score (0.81) vs. 
lower-density catheter 
dataset (F1-score, 0.66)
•  Implication: Supports using ML for objective 
driver identification from EGM frequency 
content
•  Limitations: Ex vivo study; performance is 
dependent on mapping density
  Bars et al. 
(2023)32
71 patients  
(persistent AF)
Intracardiac EGM/AI 
software for spatio-
temporal dispersion 
mapping
Characterizes spatiotem-
poral dispersion patterns 
and compares them 
between induced and 
spontaneous AF
Dispersion distribution 
was similar, but global 
dispersion was higher in 
spontaneous LA-AF (15% 
vs. 10%)
•  Implication: Foundational study for 
TAILORED-AF, showing that dispersion patterns 
differ by AF induction method
•  Limitations: Observational; characterizes pat-
terns; does not directly assess ablation outcome
  Deisenhofer 
et al. (2024)33 
(TAILORED-AF)
374 randomized 
patients (persistent 
AF)
Intracardiac EGM (spati-
otemporal dispersion)/
AI software (Volta VX1)
Guides substrate ablation 
by targeting AI-identified 
EGM dispersion markers in 
a prospective RCT
AI-guided ablation + PVI 
was superior to PVI alone 
for 12-month AF-free 
survival (89% vs. 67%)
•  Implication: RCT evidence supports AI-guided 
substrate ablation benefit in persistent AF
•  Limitations: Interim analysis of a trial using spe-
cific AI software; long-term outcomes awaited
  Tang et al. 
(2022)35
156 patients (mixed 
AF)
Intracardiac EGM + 
12-lead ECG + clinical 
data/CNN + fusion ML
Predicts 1-year ablation 
recurrence using a multi-
modal fusion of electro-
physiologic and clinical 
data
Superior prediction (AUC, 
0.86) vs. single-modality 
models or clinical scores 
alone:
• EGM signals (AUC, 0.73)
•  APPLE scores (AUC, 
0.64)
•  CHA2DS2-VASc scores 
(AUC, 0.65)
•  Implication: Demonstrates the value of ML 
fusion integrating diverse data sources for 
prognostication
•  Limitations: Retrospective design; requires 
external validation
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; AI, artificial intelligence; AUC, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; BMI, body mass index; CNN, convolutional 
neural network; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; EGF, electrographic flow; EGM, electrogram; GBM, gradient boosting method; LA, left atrium; 
LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; ML, machine learning; MR, mitral regurgitation; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PVI, pulmonary vein isolation; RCT, randomized 
controlled trial; XAI, explainable artificial intelligence.
Table 2: (continued)
D. J. Gonzalez, S. Kambampati, E. Godinez, et al.
6586 The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026
Intelligent monitoring and management  
adjustment
The substantial volume of data generated by long-term 
monitoring devices, such as implantable loop record -
ers (ILRs), pacemakers, and wearables, is well suited 
for AI-driven analysis. 9 AI algorithms can automate AF 
detection and burden quantification more accurately 
from these continuous data streams, aiding in the objec -
tive assessment of treatment efficacy (eg, response to 
AAD or ablation).12
ILRs often generate false-positive AF detections, fre -
quently triggered by events such as premature atrial 
contractions. AI-based filters, however, can significantly 
improve the diagnostic accuracy of ILRs. Mittal et  al. 
(2021) demonstrated that one such AI filter improved the 
PPV of ILR-detected AF episodes from 53.9% to 74.5%, 
while only minimally affecting the detection of true AF.40 
Building on this, AI algorithms integrated into ILR sys -
tems can substantially decrease the transmission of these 
false-positive alerts and episodes. Middeldorp et  al. 
(2025) showed that these AI algorithms reduced the alert 
burden by approximately 20% and the episode burden by 
around 40%, which can help alleviate clinic workload.41
Beyond improving current detection accuracy, pre -
dictive analytics applied to longitudinal rhythm and 
activity data might forecast clinically relevant events, 
such as progression from paroxysmal to persistent AF 
or impending heart failure decompensation, poten -
tially enabling preemptive interventions. 11 While still 
largely developmental, AI could potentially identify 
patient-specific AF triggers from wearable sensor data 
(combining rhythm, activity, sleep, etc.) or assist in per -
sonalizing AAD selection and dosing based on predicted 
efficacy and side effect profiles derived from patient 
phenotypes.3,9 Given the documented discrepancies 
between guideline recommendations and real-world 
AAD prescribing practices, AI-based clinical decision 
support tools could offer valuable assistance, although 
robust validation is required. 3
Enhancing patient engagement and integrated 
care
AI technologies can also bolster patient engagement 
and facilitate integrated care models. Natural language 
processing techniques can analyze patient communi -
cations (eg, portal messages) to identify concerns or 
unreported symptoms. 9 Beyond direct patient com -
munications, natural language processing can also 
extract crucial information from narrative EHR text, 
such as clinical notes and reports, to more accurately 
define risk factors and improve the prediction of future 
AF incidence. 42 Furthermore, conversational AI, in the 
form of large language models, is being explored for 
its potential to deliver personalized education on AF. 
Studies evaluating these large language models have 
found that they can provide accurate responses to 
many patient-centered questions regarding AF. 43,44 For 
instance, ChatGPT-4 demonstrated high accuracy for 
patient-level queries 44 and showed improvement in its 
responses over time. 43 However, the reliability of these 
models for more complex, provider-level questions is 
currently lower, and they may not always reflect the 
most recent guidelines or nuances in clinical manage -
ment. The readability of large language model (LLM)-
generated content also varies, sometimes requiring a 
college-level understanding, which is an important 
consideration for patient education. 43,44 AI-enhanced 
digital dashboards integrated with EHRs can provide 
clinicians with real-time, synthesized views of patient 
status, incorporating data from multiple sources (EHRs 
devices, patient-reported outcomes) to support timely 
and informed interventions. LLMs may also streamline 
clinician interaction with complex EHR data, facilitat -
ing efficient information retrieval and summarization. 9 
Collectively, these applications aim to render chronic 
AF management more proactive, data-informed, per -
sonalized, and collaborative, aligning strongly with 
the principles of integrated care pathways like the ABC 
framework. 2
Limitations and future directions
Despite rapid advancements and considerable promise, 
significant limitations must be addressed for the effec -
tive and equitable clinical translation of AI in AF man -
agement.9–12 The performance of AI models is heavily 
dependent on the quality, size, and representativeness of 
the training data. Algorithms validated on data from spe-
cific populations or health care systems may lack gener -
alizability when applied to new, diverse settings. Robust 
external validation across multicenter, heterogeneous 
datasets is therefore critical but remains frequently lack -
ing in the published literature. 28,35 Data fragmentation 
across institutions and incompatible data formats further 
hinder the development and validation of broadly appli-
cable AI tools.9
A fundamental barrier to widespread clinical integra -
tion is the inherent complexity of many advanced AI 
models, particularly deep learning algorithms, which 
often results in a “black box” phenomenon where the 
reasoning behind a prediction is not transparent. This 
lack of interpretability, as highlighted in recent clini -
cal commentary, can erode clinical trust, hinder adop -
tion, and make it challenging to identify and mitigate 
potential biases encoded within the algorithm. 13,30 The 
development and application of XAI techniques are 
therefore vital to foster understanding and confidence 
among clinicians. Practical integration into existing 
clinical workflows represents another substantial hur -
dle; AI tools require intuitive user interfaces and seam -
less integration with EHR systems to avoid disrupting 
established care processes and adding to the clinician 
burden.9 The resource implications and workflow 
adjustments required for complex AI applications, such 
as advanced intraprocedural mapping systems or com -
putationally intensive pre-procedural planning, must 
be carefully balanced against their demonstrated clin -
ical benefits. 8,29,33,34
AI-driven Detection, Mapping, and Personalized Therapy for AF
The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026 6587

Crucially, the ultimate measure of success for any AI 
application in medicine is the demonstration of improved 
patient-important clinical outcomes, not merely technical 
accuracy or predictive performance. Rigorous prospective 
studies, ideally randomized controlled trials (RCTs), are 
paramount to establish the clinical utility and real-world 
effectiveness of AI-driven strategies.3,4,8,15,33 Furthermore, 
comprehensive cost-effectiveness analyses are necessary, 
particularly for resource-intensive AI solutions, to justify 
their adoption within health care systems. 7,36 Ensuring 
equitable access to AI-enabled care and actively mitigat -
ing algorithmic bias, which could potentially exacerbate 
existing health disparities, are critical ethical consider -
ations that must be proactively addressed. 11 Agile and 
appropriate regulatory frameworks are also required to 
oversee the development, validation, and implementa -
tion of clinical AI tools.9
Beyond technical hurdles, the deployment of AI in clin -
ical practice is governed by profound ethical consider -
ations that are paramount for responsible innovation. 45 
A primary concern is algorithmic bias, where models 
trained on non-representative data can perpetuate or 
even worsen health disparities for underrepresented 
racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic groups. Equally impor -
tant are the principles of data privacy and security, which 
mandate robust governance to protect sensitive patient 
information from unauthorized access or misuse, in line 
with regulations such as the General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR). Furthermore, the opacity of many AI 
models raises complex questions of accountability and 
liability; determining responsibility when an AI-driven 
recommendation contributes to an adverse outcome is 
a critical challenge for clinicians, institutions, and devel -
opers alike. Achieving true digital inclusion also requires 
moving beyond simple access to address a range of inter-
woven factors. This involves creating a comprehensive 
ethical framework that systematically addresses not only 
social but also the crucial digital and commercial deter -
minants of health (such as digital literacy and the mar -
ket-driven nature of consumer wearables) to ensure that 
the benefits of AI in AF care do not create a new digital 
divide.46 Proactively establishing ethical frameworks to 
address these issues of bias, privacy, accountability, and 
equity is a non-negotiable prerequisite for building AI 
systems that are not only effective but fundamentally 
trustworthy.45
Future priorities should focus on large-scale, prospec -
tive validation studies emphasizing clinical utility and 
patient outcomes across diverse, representative popu -
lations. Standardization of methodologies for AI devel -
opment, validation, and reporting (akin to Consolidated 
Standards of Reporting Trials [CONSORT] guidelines 
for RCTs) would enhance transparency and comparabil -
ity across studies. Continued advancements in XAI are 
needed to improve model transparency and trustworthi-
ness. Ultimately, successful and responsible integration 
of AI into AF care requires sustained collaboration among 
clinicians, data scientists, engineers, regulators, health 
care administrators, and patients. The synergy between 
data-driven ML approaches and mechanistic compu -
tational modeling represents a particularly promising 
frontier for developing more robust and interpretable AI 
solutions.7,26,34
Conclusions
AI is rapidly evolving from a conceptual promise into a 
suite of tangible tools poised to significantly influence 
the diagnosis and management of AF across its entire 
spectrum. AI-augmented analysis of ECG and wearable 
sensor data is enhancing the efficiency and reach of AF 
detection and screening initiatives. Within the electro -
physiology laboratory, AI-driven mapping techniques 
provide patient-specific insights to guide more targeted 
and potentially more effective catheter ablation strate -
gies, with emerging RCT evidence supporting improved 
rhythm outcomes for specific patient subgroups. ML 
models demonstrate superior accuracy over traditional 
risk scores in predicting treatment outcomes, particularly 
for ablation, by adeptly integrating complex, multimodal 
patient data. Furthermore, AI presents compelling oppor-
tunities to optimize long-term AF care through more per-
sonalized anticoagulation strategies, intelligent remote 
monitoring, and potentially tailored pharmacotherapy 
selection and adjustment.
However, translating this considerable potential into 
widespread, effective clinical practice requires navigat -
ing significant challenges. Rigorous prospective valida -
tion demonstrating improved, patient-centric outcomes 
in diverse real-world populations is essential. Addressing 
critical issues of model interpretability and bias, ensuring 
seamless and efficient workflow integration, demonstrat-
ing cost-effectiveness, and establishing robust regulatory 
and ethical frameworks are non-negotiable prerequisites 
for responsible adoption. The role of AI must be carefully 
cultivated as a powerful adjunct to, rather than a replace-
ment for, clinical judgment, shared decision-making, and 
established principles of integrated care. Continued inter-
disciplinary collaboration and focused research address -
ing these key challenges are paramount to fully harness 
AI’s transformative potential for improving the lives of 
patients with AF worldwide.
References
1. Linz D, Gawalko M, Betz K, et al. Atrial fibrillation: epide -
miology, screening and digital health. Lancet Reg Health Eur. 
2024;37:100786.
2. Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, et al. 2020 ESC Guidelines 
for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation 
developed in collaboration with the European Association 
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS): the Task Force for 
the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation of the 
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Developed with 
the special contribution of the European Heart Rhythm 
Association (EHRA) of the ESC. Eur Heart J . 2021;42(5):  
373–498.
3. Reiffel JA. Selected advancements in the management of 
atrial fibrillation from the year 2021. J Innov Card Rhythm 
Manag. 2022;13(1):4840–4846.
D. J. Gonzalez, S. Kambampati, E. Godinez, et al.
6588 The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026
4. Kirchhof P , Camm AJ, Goette A, et al. Early rhythm-control 
therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med . 
2020;383(14):1305–1316.
5. Andrade JG, Champagne J, Deyell MW, et al. A randomized 
clinical trial of early invasive intervention for atrial fibril -
lation (EARLY-AF) – methods and rationale. Am Heart J . 
2018;206:94–104.
6. Wazni OM, Dandamudi G, Sood N, et al. Cryoballoon abla-
tion as initial therapy for atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med . 
2021;384(4):316–324.
7. Shade JK, Ali RL, Basile D, et al. Preprocedure application of 
machine learning and mechanistic simulations predicts like-
lihood of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation recurrence follow -
ing pulmonary vein isolation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 
2020;13(7):e008213.
8. Reddy VY, Langbein A, Petru J, et al. A randomized trial of 
electrographic flow-guided redo ablation for nonparoxys -
mal atrial fibrillation (FLOW-AF). JACC Clin Electrophysiol . 
2024;10(8):1856–1869.
9. Baykaner T, Noseworthy PA, Wan EY. Implementing AI 
in clinical practice: practical insights on integrating AI 
through digital dashboards and beyond. Heart Rhythm . 
2024;21(10):e259–e261.
10. Siontis KC, Yao X, Pirruccello JP , Philippakis AA, Nose-  
worthy PA. How will machine learning inform the clinical 
care of atrial fibrillation? Circ Res. 2020;127(1):155–169.
11. Harmon DM, Sehrawat O, Maanja M, Wight J, Noseworthy 
PA. Artificial intelligence for the detection and treatment of 
atrial fibrillation. Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev. 2023;12:e12.
12. Ng B, Nayyar S, Chauhan VS. The role of artificial intelli -
gence and machine learning in clinical cardiac electrophysi-
ology. Can J Cardiol. 2022;38(2):246–258.
13. Abgrall G, Holder AL, Chelly Dagdia Z, Zeitouni K, Monnet 
X. Should AI models be explainable to clinicians? Crit Care. 
2024;28(1):301.
14. Attia ZI, Noseworthy PA, Lopez-Jimenez F, et al. An artifi -
cial intelligence-enabled ECG algorithm for the identifica -
tion of patients with atrial fibrillation during sinus rhythm: 
a retrospective analysis of outcome prediction. Lancet. 
2019;394(10201):861–867.
15. Noseworthy PA, Attia ZI, Behnken EM, et  al. Artificial 
intelligence-guided screening for atrial fibrillation using  
electrocardiogram during sinus rhythm: a prospec -
tive non-randomised interventional trial. Lancet. 2022;  
400(10359):1206–1212.
16. Hygrell T, Viberg F, Dahlberg E, et  al. An artificial intelli -
gence-based model for prediction of atrial fibrillation from 
single-lead sinus rhythm electrocardiograms facilitating 
screening. Europace. 2023;25(4):1332–1338.
17. Perez MV , Mahaffey KW, Hedlin H, et al. Large-scale assess-
ment of a smartwatch to identify atrial fibrillation. N Engl J 
Med. 2019;381(20):1909–1917.
18. Guo Y, Wang H, Zhang H, Chen Y, Lip GYH. Population-
based screening or targeted screening based on initial clin -
ical risk assessment for atrial fibrillation: a report from the 
Huawei Heart Study. J Clin Med. 2020;9(5):1493.
19. Guo Y, Wang H, Zhang H, et  al. Photoplethysmography-
based machine learning approaches for atrial fibrillation 
prediction: a report from the Huawei Heart Study. JACC 
Asia. 2021;1(3):399–408.
20. Ballinger B, Hsieh J, Singh A, et al. DeepHeart: semi-super -
vised sequence learning for cardiovascular risk prediction. 
Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell. 2018;32(1).
21. Tison GH, Sanchez JM, Ballinger B, et al. Passive detection 
of atrial fibrillation using a commercially available smart -
watch. JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3(5):409–416.
22. Vo K, El-Khamy M, Choi Y. PPG-to-ECG signal transla -
tion for continuous atrial fibrillation detection via atten -
tion-based deep state-space modeling. In: 2024 46th Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society (EMBC). Orlando: IEEE; 2024:1–7.
23. Mannhart D, Lischer M, Knecht S, et al. Clinical validation of 
5 direct-to-consumer wearable smart devices to detect atrial 
fibrillation: BASEL wearable study. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 
2023;9(2):232–242.
24. Hill NR, Groves L, Dickerson C, et  al. Identification of 
undiagnosed atrial fibrillation using a machine learn -
ing risk-prediction algorithm and diagnostic testing 
(PULsE-AI) in primary care: a multi-centre randomized con-
trolled trial in England. Eur Heart J Digit Health . 2022;3(2):  
195–204.
25. Roychoudhury R, Ma S, Qian C. Stroke prevention and 
intracranial hemorrhage risk in atrial fibrillation manage -
ment: a mini review. Brain Circ. 2023;9(3):148–153.
26. Chahine Y, Magoon MJ, Maidu B, Del Álamo JC, Boyle PM, 
Akoum N. Machine learning and the conundrum of stroke 
risk prediction. Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev. 2023;12:e07.
27. McIntyre WF, Benz AP , Tojaga N, Brandes A, Lopes RD, 
Healey JS. Direct oral anticoagulants for stroke prevention 
in patients with device-detected atrial fibrillation: assess -
ing net clinical benefit. Eur Heart J Suppl . 2024;26(Suppl 
4):iv4–iv11.
28. Noujaim C, Feng H, Bidaoui G, et  al. Machine learn -
ing-driven identification of distinct persistent atrial fibril -
lation phenotypes: a cluster analysis of DECAAF II. J 
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2025;36(2):457–466.
29. Haines DE, Kong MH, Ruppersberg P , et al. Electrographic 
flow mapping for atrial fibrillation: theoretical basis and 
preliminary observations. J Interv Card Electrophysiol . 
2023;66(4):1015–1028.
30. Alhusseini MI, Abuzaid F, Rogers AJ, et al. Machine learning 
to classify intracardiac electrical patterns during atrial fibril-
lation: machine learning of atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol. 2020;13(8):e008160.
31. Zolotarev AM, Hansen BJ, Ivanova EA, et al. Optical map -
ping-validated machine learning improves atrial fibrillation 
driver detection by multi-electrode mapping. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol. 2020;13(10):e008249.
32. Bars C, Gitenay E, Monteau J, et  al. Artificial intelligence-  
enabled spatio-temporal dispersion mapping for persistent 
AF: similarities and differences between pacing-induced or 
spontaneous AF. Europace. 2023;25:euad122.163.
33. Deisenhofer I, Albenque J-P , Busch S, et  al. Lb-469805-01  
tailored cardiac ablation procedure for persistent atrial 
fibrillation guided by artificial intelligence: the tailored-  
AF randomized clinical trial. Heart Rhythm . 2024;21(7):  
1199.
34. Boyle PM, Zghaib T, Zahid S, et al. Computationally guided 
personalized targeted ablation of persistent atrial fibrilla -
tion. Nat Biomed Eng. 2019;3(11):870–879.
35. Tang S, Razeghi O, Kapoor R, et  al. Machine learning-en -
abled multimodal fusion of intra-atrial and body surface 
signals in prediction of atrial fibrillation ablation outcomes. 
Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2022;15(8):e010850.
36. Razeghi O, Kapoor R, Alhusseini MI, et al. Atrial fibrillation 
ablation outcome prediction with a machine learning fusion 
framework incorporating cardiac computed tomography. J 
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2023;34(5):1164–1174.
37. Roney CH, Sim I, Yu J, et  al. Predicting atrial fibrillation 
recurrence by combining population data and virtual 
cohorts of patient-specific left atrial models. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol. 2022;15(2):e010253.
AI-driven Detection, Mapping, and Personalized Therapy for AF
The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026 6589

38. Firouznia M, Feeny AK, LaBarbera MA, et  al. Machine 
learning-derived fractal features of shape and texture of the 
left atrium and pulmonary veins from cardiac computed 
tomography scans are associated with risk of recurrence of 
atrial fibrillation postablation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 
2021;14(3):e009265.
39. Bautista JAL, Lin C-Y, Lu C-T, et  al. Clinical signifi -
cance of substrate characteristics and ablation outcomes 
in patients with atrial fibrillation and significant func -
tional mitral regurgitation. Front Cardiovasc Med . 2023;10:  
1265890.
40. Mittal S, Oliveros S, Li J, Barroyer T, Henry C, Gardella C. 
AI filter improves positive predictive value of atrial fibrilla-
tion detection by an implantable loop recorder. JACC Clin 
Electrophysiol. 2021;7(8):965–975.
41. Middeldorp ME, Thomas G, Kamsani SH, et  al. Use 
of artificial intelligence algorithms to reduce trans -
missions in implantable loop recorders. Heart Rhythm . 
2025;22(7):E241–E243.
42. Ashburner JM, Chang Y, Wang X, et  al. Natural language 
processing to improve prediction of incident atrial fibril -
lation using electronic health records. J Am Heart Assoc . 
2022;11(15):e026014.
43. El Hajjar AH, Kassab J, Ammoury C, et  al. Accuracy and 
evolution of large language models in atrial fibrillation-re -
lated queries: a patient- and provider-centered approach. 
Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2024;17(9):e012919.
44. Kassar A, Macheret F, Kondamudi N, et  al. Performance 
of large language models as a resource for patients and 
healthcare professionals on atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 
2024;21(10):2048–2050.
45. Harishbhai Tilala M, Kumar Chenchala P , Choppadandi A, 
et  al. Ethical considerations in the use of artificial intelli -
gence and machine learning in health care: a comprehensive 
review. Cureus. 2024;16(6):e62443.
46. Narayan SM, Chung MK, Adedinsewo D, et  al. Access to 
digital health technologies: personalized framework and 
global perspectives. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2026;23:9–22.
D. J. Gonzalez, S. Kambampati, E. Godinez, et al.
6590 The Journal of Innovations in Cardiac Rhythm Management, January 2026