Citation: Aarnink, E.; Zabern, M.;
Boersma, L.; Glikson, M. Mechanisms
and Prediction of Ischemic Stroke in
Atrial Fibrillation Patients. J. Clin.
Med. 2023, 12, 6491. https://
doi.org/10.3390/jcm12206491
Academic Editor: Carlos Escobar
Received: 14 September 2023
Revised: 6 October 2023
Accepted: 10 October 2023
Published: 12 October 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Journal of
Clinical Medicine
Review
Mechanisms and Prediction of Ischemic Stroke in Atrial
Fibrillation Patients
Errol Aarnink 1,†
 , Maxime Zabern 2,† , Lucas Boersma 1,3 and Michael Glikson 2,*
1 Department of Cardiology, St. Antonius Hospital, 3435 CM Nieuwegein, The Netherlands
2 Jesselson Integrated Heart Center, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem 9103102, Israel
3 Department of Cardiology, Amsterdam University Medical Center, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
* Correspondence: mglikson@szmc.org.il
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) is the most common arrhythmia in adults worldwide and repre-
sents an important burden for patients, physicians, and healthcare systems. AF is associated with
substantial mortality and morbidity, due to the disease itself and its speciﬁc complications, such as
the increased risk of stroke and thromboembolic events associated with AF. The temporal relation
between AF episodes and stroke is nonetheless incompletely understood. The factors associated with
an increased thromboembolic risk remain unclear, as well as the stroke risk stratiﬁcation. Therefore,
in this review, we intend to expose the mechanisms and physiopathology leading to intracardiac
thrombus formation and stroke in AF patients, together with the evidence supporting the causal
hypothesis. We also expose the risk factors associated with increased risk of stroke, the current
different risk stratiﬁcation tools as well as future prospects for improving this risk stratiﬁcation.
Keywords: atrial ﬁbrillation; stroke prevention; stroke prediction; left atrial appendage
1. Introduction
The worldwide burden of ischemic stroke is signiﬁcant, with almost eight million
cases on an annual basis, resulting in nearly 64 million disability-adjusted life years. More
than three million people die from ischemic stroke per year. Importantly, the incidence
of ischemic stroke has increased the last decades [1], making its etiology an increasingly
relevant topic.
Although the cause of ischemic stroke can be multifactorial, the presence of atrial
ﬁbrillation (AF) brings forth a ﬁvefold increase in ischemic stroke risk [2]. Altered interatrial
ﬂow dynamics in AF, among other processes, predispose patients to thrombus formation.
Embolization of a thrombus from the left atrium (LA) in the systemic circulation can lead
to ischemic stroke when the migrated thrombus blocks a cerebral artery. The long-term
mortality rate after cardioembolic stroke is highest among ischemic stroke subtypes [ 3].
Especially the occurrence of large artery cortical stroke is common in the presence of AF [4].
The possible subsequent disruption of higher cognitive functions has a substantial impact
on quality of life [ 5]. It is therefore of paramount importance to better understand the
mechanisms leading to ischemic stroke in patients with AF. In the current review, we aim
to establish risk factors for ischemic stroke in AF patients and contemplate their role in
prediction within this high-risk population (Figure 1).
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12206491 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jcm
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 2 of 18
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Predictors of thrombus formation in atrial ﬁbrillation AF: atrial ﬁbrillation, LVEF: left ven-
tricular ejection fraction, HCM:  hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, PF 1 + 2: prothrombin fragment 1 + 
2, TAT: thrombin-antithrombin complex, GPV: glycoprotein V, beta-TG: beta-thromboglobulin, 
CD40L: CD40 ligand, PAP: plasmin-alfa2-antiplasmin complex, PAI-1: plasminogen activator inhib-
itor, CRP: C-reactive protein, IL-6: interleukin-6, vWF: von Willebrand Factor, NOS: nitric oxide 
synthase, NO: nitric oxide, ETP: endogenous th rombin potential, SEC: spontaneous echocardio-
graphic contrast, LAA: left atrial appendage. 
2. Left Atrial Properties and Ischemic Stroke 
2.1. Migration of Cardiac Thrombi 
Thrombus formation can occur in any hear t chamber. Right-sided thrombi may mi-
grate to the pulmonary circulation, causing pulmonary embolism. Thrombi causing pul-
monary embolism nonetheless only rarely originates in the right atrium or ventricle itself; 
more often, emboli arise from deep venous th rombosis in the lower-extremity veins [6]. 
Although smaller thrombi may induce pulmon ary infarction or pleuritis, they infre-
quently cause clinically signi ﬁcant impairment of gas exchange or compromised hemo-
dynamics.  
Left-sided thrombi may have more substantial implications in the case of migration, 
even when limited in size. Subsequent small cerebral infarction can result in signi ﬁcant 
cognitive disabilities depending on the location of the lesion [7]. When these disabilities 
endure, they signiﬁcantly impact quality of life. Therefore, unraveling the left atrial prop-
erties contributing to ischemic stroke is of vital importance for understanding the etiology 
of cardioembolic stroke.  
  
Figure 1. Predictors of thrombus formation in atrial fibrillation AF: atrial fibrillation, LVEF: left
ventricular ejection fraction, HCM: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy , PF1 + 2: prothrombin fragment
1 + 2, TAT: thrombin-antithrombin complex, GPV: glycoprotein V , beta-TG: beta-thromboglobulin,
CD40L: CD40 ligand, PAP: plasmin-alfa2-antiplasmin complex, PAI-1: plasminogen activator inhibitor,
CRP: C-reactive protein, IL-6: interleukin-6, vWF: von Willebrand Factor, NOS: nitric oxide synthase,
NO: nitric oxide, ETP: endogenous thrombin potential, SEC: spontaneous echocardiographic contrast,
LAA: left atrial appendage.
2. Left Atrial Properties and Ischemic Stroke
2.1. Migration of Cardiac Thrombi
Thrombus formation can occur in any heart chamber. Right-sided thrombi may
migrate to the pulmonary circulation, causing pulmonary embolism. Thrombi causing
pulmonary embolism nonetheless only rarely originates in the right atrium or ventricle itself;
more often, emboli arise from deep venous thrombosis in the lower-extremity veins [ 6].
Although smaller thrombi may induce pulmonary infarction or pleuritis, they infrequently
cause clinically signiﬁcant impairment of gas exchange or compromised hemodynamics.
Left-sided thrombi may have more substantial implications in the case of migration,
even when limited in size. Subsequent small cerebral infarction can result in signiﬁcant
cognitive disabilities depending on the location of the lesion [7]. When these disabilities
endure, they signiﬁcantly impact quality of life. Therefore, unraveling the left atrial
properties contributing to ischemic stroke is of vital importance for understanding the
etiology of cardioembolic stroke.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 3 of 18
2.2. Virchow’s Triad in Atrial Fibrillation
In general, thrombus formation is predisposed due to the presence of one or more
components of Virchow’s triad, including endothelial activation, altered blood ﬂow, and
hypercoagulability. This concept is commonly associated with the occurrence of deep
venous thrombosis, but can be applied to the development of left atrial thrombus as well,
especially in the context of AF [8].
The poor atrial contraction resulting from AF leads to the stasis of blood in the left
atrium and left atrial appendage (LAA), altering local ﬂow conditions. Slow left atrial
blood ﬂow can result in a sludge-like structure visible as spontaneous echocardiographic
contrast (SEC), possibly due to the formation of platelet–monocyte aggregates [ 9]. SEC
is associated with several factors, including a reduced cardiac index, a larger left atrial
diameter, and permanent AF. Importantly, this phenomenon is also associated with prior
thromboembolism and can develop into a thrombus [10].
Various biomarkers of endothelial and coagulation activation, inflammation, and fibri-
nolysis are elevated in AF patients. The impairment of flow dynamics predisposes patients
to coagulation activation, which leads to increased serum levels of coagulation activation
markers. Prothrombin fragment 1 + 2 (PF1 + 2) is formed after the generation of thrombin.
The binding of thrombin results in a thrombin–antithrombin complex (TAT). PF1 + 2 and TAT
therefore give an indication of thrombin generation. Both markers are elevated in patients
with AF [11–13]. This is accompanied by an increase in downstream markers for fibrinolytic
activity . Fibrin degradation leads to the formation of D-dimer. D-dimer levels also are elevated
in patients suffering from AF and a higher D-dimer level is associated with the occurrence of
stroke or systemic embolism [14,15]. Moreover, a low LAA flow velocity (<30 cm/s) and SEC
may be associated with higher systemic D-dimer levels [16]. Other markers of fibrinolytic
activity , such as plasmin-alpha2-antiplasmin (PAP) complex, plasminogen activator inhibitor
(PAI-1), fibrinogen, and tissue plasminogen activator (TPA), could also have a role in throm-
boembolic prediction in AF patients [17–20]. The plasma fibrin clots found in AF are very
compact, which can be expressed as reduced fibrin clot permeability . This complicates the
process of fibrinolysis and increases ischemic stroke risk [21].
Although coagulation activation likely is the predominant process for thrombus for-
mation in AF, the activation of platelets also plays a role. Activated platelets release several
proteins that can be used as surrogate markers for in vivo platelet activation. Multiple solu-
ble platelet activation biomarkers show an increase in patients with AF, such as P-selectin,
glycoprotein V , beta-thromboglobulin, and CD40 ligand [22].
Finally, endothelial activation and inﬂammation play a role in the predisposition to
thrombus formation in AF. The low local blood ﬂow conditions downregulate the endothe-
lial expression of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and nitric oxide (NO). These markers play an
important role in the regulation of vascular tone and have signiﬁcant antithrombotic effects.
AF leads to a reduced production of NO and NOS. Interestingly, PAI-1 is regulated by NO,
which may explain increased levels of this ﬁbrinolytic marker in AF [ 23]. Furthermore, the
endothelial function can be assessed by measuring plasma’s von Willebrand factor (vWF).
This marker shows an increase in AF patients, with higher levels predicting stroke—but
only in univariate analysis [24]. The relation of vWF with stroke therefore remains unclear.
Furthermore, inﬂammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6
(IL-6) are increased in AF [25]. Over time, inﬂammatory processes result in ﬁbrosis and
atrial remodeling [26].
These ﬁndings on the activation of coagulation, platelets, ﬁbrinolysis, and the en-
dothelium suggest that AF inﬂuences multiple processes involved in thrombus formation,
propagation, and maintenance. AF patients therefore demonstrate an increased thrombotic
tendency, a phenomenon often described as a prothrombotic state [27].
2.3. Atrial Remodeling, Fibrosis, and Atrial Fibrillation
AF leads to contractile, structural, and electrophysiological changes over time [ 28].
Furthermore, the presence of AF by itself leads to higher susceptibility to subsequent
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 4 of 18
arrhythmic episodes [ 29]. AF therefore has a natural disease progression, worsening
from paroxysmal to persistent and then permanent, with the success rate of cardioversion
gradually declining. The presence of AF is correlated with left atrial dilatation, with a
prolonged duration of AF as a predictor of a larger LA diameter [ 30,31]. Although not
consistently present in the literature [ 32], LA enlargement may predispose patients to
thrombus formation and stroke [ 33,34]. For AF patients, this may add to the increased
stroke risk over time due to disease progression. This is accompanied by the association of
an LAA thrombus with an AF type (paroxysmal, persistent, or permanent) [32]. However,
AF duration and burden alone fail to fully explain the cardioembolic risk, and the temporal
relationship between embolic events and AF episodes is unclear [35].
Interestingly, atrial remodeling may already start before clinical AF appears. In
the PREDICT-AF trial [36], the LAA was excluded and blood was collected in patients
without AF undergoing cardiothoracic surgery. Patients that developed AF during a 2-year
follow-up period (12%) showed increased levels of multiple plasma and tissue biomarkers,
combined with altered gene expression. This implies that atrial remodeling precedes AF
and that the arrhythmogenic substrate can be detected at an early stage.
Remodeling due to AF is accompanied by the formation of ﬁbrosis in the LA. Fibrotic
tissue has poor conductive properties, which may lead to the progression of AF due to
reentry mechanisms. Left atrial ﬁbrosis can be quantiﬁed using (delayed enhancement)
magnetic resonance imaging. Patients with a prior history of stroke had a signiﬁcantly
higher percentage of LA ﬁbrosis in a study carried out by Daccarett et al. In multivariate
logistic regression analysis, LA ﬁbrosis independently predicted stroke and more severe ﬁ-
brosis was associated with higher odds for stroke [37]. In addition to stroke, LA ﬁbrosis also
correlates with the presence of SEC or an LAA thrombus [38], underlining its importance
in disease progression and thrombosis.
Remodeling and ﬁbrosis inﬂuence electrophysiological function, yielding electro-
cardiographic surrogate markers for these underlying processes that can be more easily
assessed than when performing (magnetic resonance) imaging. During AF, novel electro-
cardiographic methods can be used to precisely determine the ﬁbrillatory wave amplitude
and dominant frequency, providing an idea of AF complexity. Retaining sinus rhythm after
catheter ablation and electrocardioversion shows a relation with these markers [39,40]. In
sinus rhythm, the mean P-wave duration and terminal velocity in V1 (as an indicator of
left atrial excitation) may be inﬂuenced by remodeling, thus providing an early marker
for AF propensity [41]. Both P-wave duration and terminal velocity, along with P-wave
dispersion (the time between the longest and shortest P-wave duration within different
leads), have been associated with thrombus formation within the LAA [42]. Maheshwari
et al. [43], in their study on almost 3000 patients, presumed that the P-wave morphology
in sinus rhythm presented an opportunity to detect pro-thrombotic atrial remodeling via
measurement of the P-wave indices. They observed that an abnormal P-wave axis was
associated with an increased risk of stroke independent of the CHA2DS2-VASc variables.
They thus developed the P2-CHA2DS2-VASc score, which improves the ischemic stroke
prediction compared to the regular CHA2DS2-VASc score. Similarly, ﬁbrillatory wave
amplitude may be associated with LAA dysfunction and thromboembolism [44], but the
literature on its relation to stroke is scarce. These markers may provide an estimation of the
severity of electrophysiological remodeling within AF and thereby stroke propensity.
2.4. Atrial Cardiomyopathy
Historically, AF has been described as the main driving factor contributing to car-
dioembolic stroke, with blood pooling in the atria during irregular contractions as the
main cause of thrombus formation. However, some inconsistencies remain with this theory.
Following this rationale, the duration of AF episodes and thus the type of AF (paroxysmal,
persistent, or permanent) should be an important predictor of ischemic stroke. Although
the thromboembolic risk seems slightly higher in non-paroxysmal AF [45], a strong relation
between the presence of (sub-clinical) AF and the occurrence of ischemic stroke is uncer-
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 5 of 18
tain [46]. Moreover, the temporal relationship between an episode of AF and the occurrence
of a thromboembolic event is not so clear-cut [35]. Even after successful ablation for AF,
the guidelines recommend the continuation of oral anticoagulation therapy (OAT) in those
at increased thromboembolic risk [ 47]. Time in AF may therefore insufﬁciently predict
ischemic stroke risk.
The attention on atrial cardiomyopathy (ACM) as a risk factor for ischemic stroke has
grown in the past decade. ACM is deﬁned as “any complex of structural, architectural,
contractile or electrophysiological changes affecting the atria with the potential to produce
clinically-relevant manifestations” [48]. The occurrence of clinical AF may be the manifes-
tation of longer-progressing ACM. It is likely that ischemic stroke is a consequence of the
interplay between AF, ACM, and local and systemic risk factors. Patients without clinical
AF, but demonstrating signs of ACM combined with systemic risk factors, might beneﬁt
from anticoagulant use.
The ongoing ARCADIA trial [49] investigates a population of patients with a history of
embolic stroke of undetermined source (ESUS) and the characteristics of ACM. To be eligible
for the study , patients should have at least one of the following markers: a P-wave terminal
force >5000µV × ms in lead V1 on an electrocardiogram, serum NT-proBNP > 250 pg/mL,
and/or a left atrial diameter index≥ 3 cm/m2 on an echocardiogram. In this randomized,
double-blind trial, the use of apixaban is compared to aspirin for the primary efficacy outcome
of recurrent stroke of any type. Importantly , patients with known AF are excluded from this
trial. ARCADIA may further elucidate the importance of ACM as a substrate for ischemic
stroke in the absence of AF and provide insights into the optimal approach to minimizing
stroke risk. Of note, the NA VIGATE-ESUS trial [50] investigated rivaroxaban versus aspirin in
a much broader population with ESUS in the absence of identified risk factors for a cardiac
source of embolism. This trial was ended prematurely due to higher bleeding rates in the
rivaroxaban group, without evidence for improved efficacy . Likewise, dabigatran did not
result in a reduced recurrent stroke rate compared to aspirin in the RE-SPECT ESUS trial [51],
although not at the cost of higher bleeding risk. The future will point out whether the
subpopulation with characteristics of ACM will benefit from OAT.
3. The Left Atrial Appendage as the Cradle of Thrombi
In the etiology of cardioembolic stroke in patients suffering from AF, the LAA is a
structure of particular interest. Although the LAA plays a role in homeostasis, hemody-
namics, and arrhythmogenesis [52], it is mostly infamous for its role in thrombus formation.
In their 1996 review, Blackshear and Odell reported that 91% of LA thrombi in patients
with non-rheumatic AF originated in the LAA [53]. This observation paved the way for
occlusion of the LAA as a method for mechanical protection from ischemic stroke and
systemic embolism. But why may thrombi so often develop in the LAA?
3.1. Morphologic Features
The shape and structure of the LAA vary widely among individuals, and a person’s
LAA may be as unique as their ﬁngerprint. Nevertheless, an attempt has been made
to classify the various LAA shapes into some creatively devised main categories. The
most common LAA morphology is the chicken wing, present in about half of patients.
Other LAA shapes include the windsock, cactus, and cauliﬂower, among a plethora of
others. These morphologic types are of clinical importance, as chicken wing morphology is
associated with a lower rate of stroke/TIA compared to other LAA types [54,55], although
the interobserver reproducibility of classifying the shape of the LAA is poor and remains
one of the limitations of the LAA shape criteria [56]. In addition to the general shape, other
morphologic features may also be of importance for the development of LAA thrombi.
During postmortem examination, Ernst et al. found appendages containing thrombi to
be signiﬁcantly larger than those without thrombi [57]. The importance of LAA size as a
contributor to thromboembolic risk was conﬁrmed by Taina et al., showing larger LAA
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 6 of 18
volume (adjusted for body surface area) in patients with cryptogenic stroke compared to
age- and gender-matched controls [58].
While several anatomical terms exist for the classiﬁcation of the outer shape of the
LAA, the inside is hard to classify qualitatively due to its complex structure and numerous
trabeculations. For this purpose, quantitative assessment methods have been developed.
The mathematical concept of fractal dimension can be used to quantify trabeculation
complexity, which showed an association with history of stroke [ 59]. This ﬁnding is in
line with earlier observations that more complex appendages are prone to developing
thrombi, especially when consisting of more than two lobes [34] or having more extensive
trabeculations [60]. In addition to this method, statistical shape analysis can quantify the
shape of the endocardial LA/LAA surface using automated computation of landmark
points on computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In a study
by Bieging et al. [ 61], AF patients with prior stroke showed different LAA morphology.
High-risk LAAs had a broader, shorter, and less angulated body with the tip superior to the
ostium, whereas low-risk LAAs were longer and more angulated. Interestingly, endocardial
LA morphology was not of importance.
Furthermore, the contractility of the LAA affects the likelihood of local thrombus develop-
ment, irrespective of LA contractility . Strain is an echocardiographic biomarker of myocardial
tissue deformation during systole and thus gives an indication of local myocardial contractility
and mechanistic function [62]. When measured in the LAA, the strain parameters are signif-
icantly lower in AF patients with thrombi or SEC compared to AF patients without [63,64].
LAA strain proved higher in patients with sinus rhythm and lower in patients with permanent
AF as opposed to patients with paroxysmal AF [65]. Additionally , strain echocardiography
can assess the timing of LAA contractions, quantifying contractile irregularity as mechanical
dispersion. Increased mechanical dispersion has been demonstrated to correlate with the
occurrence of LAA thrombi or SEC [66]. In a study by Mao et al. [67], patients with a prior
thromboembolic event had significantly lower LAA strain in all categorized LAA regions
(basal, middle, apical, and global longitudinal strain) as well as higher mechanical dispersion,
with only mechanical dispersion remaining statistically significant in multivariate logistic
regression analysis. Further research will have to show whether LAA strain measurements
can play a role in thromboembolic risk stratification.
3.2. Flow Dynamics
LAA shape, complexity, and contractility all contribute to local hemodynamics and
(the stagnation of) ﬂow. Maximum ﬂow velocity, measured just below the LAA ostium,
is an important marker of local thrombogenicity. It is associated with SEC and LAA
thrombi as well as with cardioembolic stroke [68,69]. Interestingly, known predictors of
thromboembolic risk, such as LA size, left ventricular ejection fraction, type of AF, age,
and sex, all inﬂuence LAA ﬂow velocity [ 70]. Moreover, LAA ﬂow velocity negatively
correlates with the LAA oriﬁce area [71]. A larger oriﬁce area has been linked to thrombus
formation and ischemic stroke irrespective of LAA volume [60,72,73] and may be one of
the causes of low ﬂow velocity. Interestingly, the oriﬁce area is smaller in chicken wing
appendages [74], possibly contributing to the lower stroke risk in this morphology type.
LA and LAA ﬂow patterns are inﬂuenced by the presence of mitral regurgitation, a
phenomenon that has been hypothesized to have a protective effect on stroke risk in AF
patients, especially in the context of LA enlargement [75,76]. However, newer studies in
larger cohorts debate this effect, especially when accounting for modern-day risk scores
such as CHA2DS2-VASc [77]. Also, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) could indirectly
inﬂuence LA/LAA ﬂow dynamics. Although non-uniformly described in literature, it may
be associated with the occurrence of LAA thrombi and ischemic stroke in AF [32,78–80].
The maximum LAA ﬂow velocity is an important marker of local thrombogenicity, yet
it is limited by its two-dimensional character. The ﬂow velocity depends on the moment of
measurement, both within the cardiac cycle and depending on the underlying rhythm—AF
or sinus rhythm. Furthermore, it may vary between observers due to different measurement
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 7 of 18
locations. Newer technologies could overcome these inconsistencies. Four-dimensional
ﬂow analysis is a new imaging modality that enables the quantiﬁcation of complex intracar-
diac ﬂow patterns using particle tracking. Demirkan et al. recently emphasized its potential
in the context of left ventricular thrombus formation following myocardial infarction [81].
In their study using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, patients with left ventricular
thrombi demonstrated a reduced direct systolic ﬂow and a more delayed and residual ﬂow.
Additionally, the ﬂow patterns changed, with reduced vorticity (i.e., rotational motion) and
kinetic energy in patients with myocardial infarction compared to healthy controls. These
ﬁndings illustrate the potential of four-dimensional ﬂow analysis in further understanding
local ﬂow patterns and their importance in thrombogenesis, especially when applied to
the LA and LAA. In this regard, Markl et al. [82] showed that LA and LAA volume were
positively correlated with four-dimensional-ﬂow-analysis-derived LA and LAA velocities
and negatively correlated with LA/LAA stasis. The LAA ﬂow was slower than the LA ﬂow
in patients in sinus rhythm, but this did not hold true for patients in AF. The ﬂow patterns
in AF may therefore be more complex than can be expressed using only ﬂow velocity. How-
ever, no analysis for vorticity or kinetic energy was performed in their study. Interestingly,
ﬁrst reports show that closing the LAA may improve the LA ﬂow dynamics measured by
four-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging [83]. Recently, LAA four-dimensional ﬂow
analysis has also been applied to cardiac CT, with similar outcomes to magnetic resonance
imaging [84].
While four-dimensional ﬂow analysis uses in vivo measurements, computational
ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) aim to simulate ﬂow dynamics in silico. Using this method, blood
residence time in the LA and LAA can be simulated. The residence time appears to be
longer in patients with AF versus patients with patent foramen ovales, but also in patent
ovale patients versus healthy subjects [85], suggesting its relevance to cardioembolic and
cryptogenic stroke. Furthermore, CFD show that the LAA inﬂow mainly originates from
the left pulmonary veins and that the position of the LAA with respect to the left pulmonary
veins inﬂuences the LAA ﬂow dynamics and possibly thrombogenicity [ 86,87]. In line with
in vivo observations, the CFD-derived ostium diameter and LAA length potentially predict
thrombogenic risk [88].
3.3. Local Prothrombotic Milieu
AF is associated with the activation of coagulation, platelets, and ﬁbrinolysis. However,
most research on hematological biomarkers in AF describes peripheral venipuncture for
blood collection, thus assessing systemic biomarker levels. These values do not necessarily
portray the local hemostatic status in the LA or LAA. The LAA is not only unique in terms
of morphology and ﬂow dynamics, but also has a very speciﬁc internal milieu, contributing
to another pillar of Virchow’s triad of thrombosis. In the HEART-CLOT trial [ 89], the
biomarkers of thrombin generation and ﬁbrinolysis were measured in blood collected
from six different locations, i.e., from the right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, left
ventricle, left atrial appendage, and peripheral venipuncture. The blood collected from
the LAA showed reduced ﬁbrin clot permeability, increased clot lysis time, and increased
endogenous thrombin potential compared to the peripheral blood. Other studies also
demonstrate increased local LAA markers compared to systemic markers in AF patients.
The systemic effects of AF seem more distinct in the LAA, with indications of altered
local markers of coagulation activation (TAT), platelet activation (P-selectin), endothelial
activation (vWF and NO production), and ﬁbrinolytic activity (PAI-1) [ 90–93]. These
ﬁndings suggest a more thrombogenic milieu in the LAA than in the systemic circulation,
conﬁrming its particular importance for thrombus formation in AF.
4. Temporal Association between AF and Stroke
Despite its worldwide burden and the evident association between AF and thromboem-
bolic events (TEs), the temporal association between the onset of an episode of atrial arrythmia
and the onset of an ischemic event remains unclear and controversial in the literature.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 8 of 18
In a recent clinical study on more than 7000 patients with a ﬁrst diagnosis of stroke or
AF, the authors found out that the temporal relationship between AF and stroke showed a
clustering of diagnoses of both diseases within the years around the diagnosis of the other
disease [94]. Moreover, the diagnosis of AF with a stroke or a stroke with AF is associated
with increased mortality compared to the diagnosis of each of the diseases independently.
This global association in diagnoses of the two diseases suggests a temporal correlation, but
as we discussed earlier, AF can both be the cause of the stroke/TE or just a marker or risk.
Aiming to answer that question and to prove the causality of an episode of AF in
a patient presenting with stroke, some other studies looked at the temporal relationship
between a stroke or TE and an episode of AF in a patient with cardiac implantable electronic
devices (CIEDs).
In their study, Daoud et al. [95] showed that, overall, 73% of the 40 patients presenting
with stroke or a TE equipped with CIEDs did not present any episode of atrial arrythmia in
the 30 days preceding the ischemic event. Moreover, in the 20 patients with documented
AF or an atrial high-rate episode (AHRE) prior to the ischemic event, only 55% of them
presented at least one episode in the 30 days preceding the event. Concordant results were
observed by Brambatti et al. [35]. In their study, 36% of patients with CIED monitoring had
an episode of AF or an AHRE > 6 min before the stroke, but only 8% presented an episode
in the 30 days preceding the stroke.
We can also notice that in those two studies, a number of patients (respectively,
15% and 15.6%) developed AF during CIED monitoring in the coming months after the
index event of stroke or a TE, which could also suggest that the required elements to
develop stroke, such as biological changes, atrial cardiomyopathy, and other clinical risk
factors, were already met before the appearance of AF. In those cases, stroke preceded the
appearance of AF.
In a more recent work on 891 patients, Singer et al. [ 96] evaluated in a crossover
design study the incidental risk of stroke following an episode of AF detected by a CIED by
comparing AF burden in the 30-day period prior to stroke to a control period (90–120 days
before stroke), and thus evaluated the additional risk of stroke following an episode of
atrial arrythmia. They showed that only 5.8% of patients had an informative pattern with
an episode in the 30 days before the event of stroke without a previous episode in the
control period. However, the risk of stroke in their study seems to be higher in the 1 to
5 days following an AF episode of 5.5 h or more, and even higher with an episode of AF
duration of at least 23 h or more. A similar result was observed according to the same
methodology by Turakhia et al. [97]. Table 1 summarizes the main studies on the temporal
association between AF and stroke or TE.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 9 of 18
Table 1. Temporal association between AF and a stroke/TE.
Study n Study Design Main Results
Daoud et al.,
2021 [95] 40
• TRENDS study subgroup
• Patients with a stroke/TE + 30 days
monitoring on a CIED prior to stroke
• AF ≥ 5 min with atrial rhythm ≥ 175 bpm
• 20 patients with AF prior to stroke
(9 persistent AF, 11 paroxysmal AF)
• Only 11 patients (55%) with ≥1 AF episode
within 30 days prior to stroke with
6 patients in AF at stroke time
• Only 6 patients with AF episode after stroke
Brambatti et al.,
2014 [35] 51
• ASSERT trial subgroup
• Stroke/TE + 3 months monitoring on a
CIED prior to stroke/TE
• AF ≥ 6 min with atrial rhythm ≥ 190 bpm
• 18 patients (35%) with ≥1 episode of AF
prior to stroke
• Only 4 patients (8%) with ≥1 episode of AF
in the 30 days prior to stroke
• 1 patient in AF at stroke time
• Only 8 patients with AF episode after stroke
Turakhia et al.,
2015 [97] 187
• Healthcare System database
• Case Crossover Study
• Stroke/TE + 120 days monitoring on a CIED
• AF ≥ 5.5 h/day
• 19% of patients with ≥1 AF episode prior
to stroke
• 16 patients with informative discordant
pattern with adjusted OR for ischemic
stroke of 5.22 (95% CI: 1.22–47.4)
• Risk of stroke highest within 5 days
following an episode of AF with adjusted
OR 17.4 (95% CI: 5.4–73.1), return to
baseline after 30 days
Singer et al.,
2021 [96] 891
• HealthCare database
• Case crossover study
• Stroke/TE + 120 days monitoring on CIED
• AF ≥ 5.5 h/day
• 24% of patients with ≥1 AF episode prior
to stroke
• 66 patients with informative discordant
pattern with OR for ischemic stroke of 3.71
(95% CI: 2.06–6.70)
• Risk of stroke highest within 5 days
following an episode of AF with adjusted
OR 5.00 (95% CI: 2.62–9.55)
• Highest risk of stroke if AF ≥ 23 h on a
given day
AF: Atrial Fibrillation; TE: Thromboembolic Event; CIED: Cardiac Implantable Electronic Device; OR: Odds Ratio;
CI: Conﬁdence Interval.
Moreover, the question of the threshold of the minimal pro-embolic duration of an episode
of AF or atrial burden also remains unknown. In the recent NOAH-AFNET 6 trial [98], no
benefits were observed in the anticoagulation group versus placebo in term of the reduction of
stroke in patients with implantable devices and atrial high-rate episodes of more than 6 min,
but a higher risk of bleeding was present.
5. Comorbidities and Vascular Risk Proﬁle
On top of the anatomic and echocardiographic or CT risk factors discussed earlier,
many other studies intended to identify the risk factors associated with an increased risk of
stroke or thromboembolic events in order to stratify risk, identify high-risk patients, and
eventually reduce risk with anticoagulation in those patients.
Many studies have long shown that the main independent risk factors associated
with an ischemic stroke or a thromboembolic event are a prior stroke or transient ischemic
attack, ageing (moreover, an age > 75 years old), hypertension, diabetes, and the presence
of structural heart disease (SHD) or heart failure (HF) [78,99].
More recent studies added a sex category (female) and the presence of vascular disease
as independent risk factors, and the CHA2DS2-VASc score has been validated as more
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 10 of 18
efﬁcient in predicting the risk of stroke in patients with AF [ 100]. It is now routinely
recommended to stratify the risk of stroke and indicate prophylactic anticoagulation [47].
But despite those clearly identiﬁed risk factors, some other clinical or biological param-
eters seem also to be associated with an increased risk of ischemic stroke or thromboembolic
events, and might help to further identify patients with a signiﬁcant risk of stroke in order
to treat them.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common in patients with AF (up to 15% of patients
with AF meet the criteria for the diagnosis of CKD) and the prevalence of AF increases with
the severity of renal function impairment [101]. CKD and a high level of blood creatinine have
been associated in the literature with a higher risk of an ischemic stroke or a TE [102–104], and
this risk seems to be even higher in patient with end-stage CKD. Treatment with VKA seems
to reduce the risk of stroke and even the combined risk of stroke and bleeding in patients
with AF with a high risk of stroke and CKD. A score, R2CHADS2, incorporating a reduced
creatinine clearance into the classical CHADS2 has been proposed and evaluated, and offers
a more precise prediction of stroke when compared to CHA2DS2-V ASc or CHADS2 [105]
in patients with native AF, but seems to have similar performance in predicting stroke in
patients after AF ablation [106]. Chronic renal failure has also been included as a criterion in
the ATRIA score [107] and also in the GARFIELD AF tool [108,109] which seems to have at
least as good accuracy to predict stroke or TEs in patients with AF [108,110].
Ethnicity has also been identiﬁed as a speciﬁc risk factor. Whereas the risk of devel-
oping AF seems to be lower in non-white individuals, this population has a higher risk of
stroke or TEs [111–113]. This might be due to a higher prevalence of cardiovascular risk
factors but also to intrinsic or genetical factors. The higher risk of stroke is noted at baseline
and might be due to the under-prescription of anticoagulants in this population, but this
increased risk compared to the white population persists also in patients taking anticoagu-
lants. Moreover, worse outcomes after stroke are also reported in non-white individuals. It
is also interesting to note that the non-white population is often underrepresented in large
trials on anticoagulation or left atrial appendage occlusion, and the results in this speciﬁc
population might differ from the white population in term of the efﬁcacity of treatment
due to a different metabolism and a speciﬁc proﬁle for complications.
Being overweight (BMI 25 to 30 kg/m2) and especially obesity (BMI > 30 kg/m2) are
associated with the development of AF, but they are also associated with a higher risk of
ischemic stroke or TEs [114]. This increased risk remains statistically signiﬁcant even after
adjustment for classical embolic risk factors and cardiovascular comorbidities (CHADS2
and CHA2DS2-VASc) and may be modiﬁed by sex and BMI, as it seems to be even more
important in obese individuals of male sex.
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is also a common ﬁnding associated with AF, and can
also worsen the natural history of AF. Obstructive sleep apnea has also independently
been associated with an increased risk of stroke in two different studies [115,116]. In their
study, Yaranov et al. [115] found that this OSA-associated risk is even more signiﬁcant in
patients identiﬁed at “low risk” with an increased risk of stroke of 62% in patients with a
CHA2DS2-VASc of 0 in patients with OSA compared to patients without.
Some other clinical factors have been identiﬁed as being associated with a higher
risk of stroke or TEs [ 101] such as smoking, malignancy, and some speciﬁc etiology of
cardiomyopathy such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and amyloidosis. Left ventricular
hypertrophy has been associated with increased stroke/TE risk, albeit in individuals
without AF [117].
Some biological parameters have also been described as being associated with a higher
risk of a thromboembolic event or stroke in AF patients, such as hypercoagulability evalu-
ated using D-dimer [15] but also inﬂammatory markers such as CRP [ 118], as discussed in
the ﬁrst section. More speciﬁc biological markers as cardiac speciﬁc markers like troponin
and NTpro-BNP were also associated with a greater risk of stroke [118,119]. This might be
the reﬂection of an advanced state of ACM or HF or of a deterioration in the hemodynamic
ﬂow within the LA in patients with underlying SHD or persistent AF, but it also might be
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 11 of 18
an independent marker of risk. Hyperlipidemia has also been independently associated
with an increased risk of LAA thrombi in patients with AF undergoing transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) before cardioversion or ablation, with a correlation between the
level of LDL-C and the risk of stroke. This increased risk was also observed in patients
identiﬁed as “low-risk” patients according to CHA2DS2-VASc (≤1) [119].
Different attempts have been made to incorporate those new embolic risk factors into
practical scores to evaluate the risk of stroke in a patient, resulting most of the time in an
improved statistical performance, but most of those attempts consisted of simply adding
one or two parameters to preexisting scores.
Two recent studies on a large number of patients have proposed a combination of
clinical, biological, and echocardiographic parameters. The ﬁrst one is the GARFIELD AF
tool [107], which derives from a very large multicentric international cohort and incorpo-
rates a large number of clinical parameters. Its performance in predicting stroke, death,
and bleeding was superior to CHA2DS2-VASc and HAS-BLED in the study, not only in in-
termediate or high-risk patients but also in low-risk patients. The second one is the CLOTS
AF score developed by Sagan et al. [103]. In their cohort of 1000 patients undergoing TEE in
patients in AF before cardioversion or ablation, the only factors associated in multivariate
analysis with an increased risk of LAA thrombi were creatinine blood level, left ventricular
ejection fraction, left atrial volume index, TAPSE, prior stroke, and AF rhythm. The score
developed from those parameters showed better performance in predicting LAA thrombi
than the CHA2DS2-VASc score.
6. Future Directions
6.1. Causality of AF in Stroke
Although AF is associated with an increased risk of stroke, a debate remains about
whether AF is a causal factor in the occurrence of stroke, or just a marker of risk. Malik
et al. [120] used the Bradford Hill criteria to evaluate the causality of AF in the occurrence of
stroke or TEs and highlighted that strong data supported the causal hypothesis. One of the
missing elements for proving the causal hypothesis is the evidence of a temporal association
between an episode of atrial arrythmia and stroke. This lack of temporal association might
mean that not all episodes of atrial arrythmia are equal in term of thrombogenicity and
thromboembolic risk: the stroke risk associated with an episode of atrial arrythmia might
be inﬂuenced by not only the characteristics of the episode (the duration of the episode,
type of atrial arrythmia, mean cycle length in the LA, or the hour of the episode during the
day) but also by all the changes that surround the episode: hemodynamic (heart failure
and modiﬁcation of LA and LAA ﬂow), biological (inﬂammation, hypercoagulability, and
endothelial activation), and clinical (patient daily activity). All those elements might be
clues for identifying episodes of AF at high risk of stroke and could improve our capacity
to determine the temporal relationship between a high-risk episode of atrial arrythmia and
stroke in further studies.
6.2. The Need for Improved Risk Stratiﬁcation
In contemporary medicine, ischemic stroke risk in AF patients is calculated using
the CHA2DS2-VASc score. Strong guideline recommendations are tied to this score with
respect to the management of thromboembolic risk. OAT use should be considered (class
IIa) in males with a score > 1 and in females with a score > 2, and is recommended (class Ia)
in males with a score > 2 and in females with a score > 3 [47]. Thanks to the simplicity of
the CHA2DS2-VASc score, it is widely used.
Despite the central position that CHA2DS2-VASc has in current clinical practice, its
predictive accuracy remains modest, with a C-statistic of 0.578 for prediction of throm-
boembolism [99,121]. An optimal risk score should perform dynamic risk stratiﬁcation
with precision, and include a complete panel of variables on the one hand and affordability
and ease of use on the other hand. Increasing worldwide access to the internet could make
the use of a more complex, holistic model feasible through the use of an online risk pre-
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 12 of 18
diction tool. Such a tool could overcome the need for a simplistic model that, for instance,
categorizes continuous variables, hopefully grasping the interplay between factors leading
to stroke in patients that have (a predisposition to developing) AF.
The ongoing MAESTRIA study (“Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence for
Early Detection of STroke and Atrial Fibrillation”) aims to further map the substrate for
stroke in 600 patients with paroxysmal, persistent, or permanent AF. In this international,
observational study, a wealth of information is collected, including imaging and electro-
cardiographic, omics-based, and hematologic biomarkers, which will be further analyzed
using artiﬁcial intelligence models. It will be very interesting to see whether these novel
technologies will improve the risk stratiﬁcation for stroke in AF.
6.3. A Dynamic Evaluation
Moreover, stroke and systemic embolic risk do not remain the same over time and
require dynamic evaluation and frequent update to evaluate the need for anticoagulation
treatment during the follow-up of the patient, due to the changes that can occur in the
state of the patient in terms of the natural evolution of AF (from paroxysmal to persistent,
with an increase in burden), the evolution of atrial cardiomyopathy, or the evolution
of comorbidities. Chao et al. [ 122] showed that in a population of patients with newly
diagnosed AF with initial low risk (CHA2DS2-VASc = 0 for men or CHA2DS2-VASc = 1 for
women), during the follow-up, the CHA2DS2-VASc score increased each year in 12% of the
population. Reevaluation and the prescription of anticoagulants reduced the risk of stroke
and was associated with better outcomes.
7. Conclusions
Strong evidence supports the causality of AF in the occurrence of a stroke or a throm-
boembolic event in terms of physiopathology and demographic data. Stroke is the result of
a complex and multifactorial process which is supported by both general and intracardiac
factors. Thus, numerous risk factors are identiﬁable, and the performance of the actual risk
stratiﬁcation remains modest. Further studies are needed to create a holistic and dynamic
risk stratiﬁcation which would incorporate all the identiﬁed risk factors, in order to reduce
the risk of stroke in patients with AF.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Jaron de Wit for his assistance with the
graphical design.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Feigin, V .L.; Stark, B.A.; Johnson, C.O.; Roth, G.A.; Bisignano, C.; Abady, G.G.; Abbasifard, M.; Abbasi-Kangevari, M.; Abd-Allah,
F.; Abedi, V .; et al. Global, Regional, and National Burden of Stroke and Its Risk Factors, 1990–2019: A Systematic Analysis for the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Neurol. 2021, 20, 795–820. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Wolf, P .A.; Abbott, R.D.; Kannel, W.B. Atrial Fibrillation as an Independent Risk Factor for Stroke: The Framingham Study.Stroke
1991, 22, 983–988. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Stead, L.G.; Gilmore, R.M.; Bellolio, M.F.; Jain, A.; Rabinstein, A.A.; Decker, W.W.; Agarwal, D.; Brown, R.D. Cardioembolic but
Not Other Stroke Subtypes Predict Mortality Independent of Stroke Severity at Presentation. Stroke Res. Treat. 2011, 2011, 281496.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Saxena, R.; Lewis, S.; Berge, E.; Sandercock, P .A.; Koudstaal, P .J. Risk of Early Death and Recurrent Stroke and Effect of Heparin
in 3169 Patients with Acute Ischemic Stroke and Atrial Fibrillation in the International Stroke Trial.Stroke 2001, 32, 2333–2337.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 13 of 18
5. Ayerbe, L.; Ayis, S.; Wolfe, C.D.A.; Rudd, A.G. Natural History, Predictors and Outcomes of Depression after Stroke: Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Br. J. Psychiatry J. Ment. Sci. 2013, 202, 14–21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Van Langevelde, K.; Šr ámek, A.; Vincken, P .W.J.; van Rooden, J.K.; Rosendaal, F.R.; Cannegieter, S.C. Finding the Origin of
Pulmonary Emboli with a Total-Body Magnetic Resonance Direct Thrombus Imaging Technique. Haematologica 2013, 98, 309–315.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Laredo, C.; Zhao, Y.; Rudilosso, S.; Renú, A.; Pariente, J.C.; Chamorro, Á.; Urra, X. Prognostic Signiﬁcance of Infarct Size and
Location: The Case of Insular Stroke. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 9498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Ding, W.Y.; Gupta, D.; Lip, G.Y.H. Atrial Fibrillation and the Prothrombotic State: Revisiting Virchow’s Triad in 2020.Heart 2020,
106, 1463–1468. [CrossRef]
9. Zotz, R.J.; Müller, M.; Genth-Zotz, S.; Darius, H. Spontaneous Echo Contrast Caused by Platelet and Leukocyte Aggregates?
Stroke 2001, 32, 1127–1133. [CrossRef]
10. Fatkin, D.; Kelly, R.P .; Feneley, M.P . Relations between Left Atrial Appendage Blood Flow Velocity, Spontaneous Echocardiographic
Contrast and Thromboembolic Risk in Vivo. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 1994, 23, 961–969. [CrossRef]
11. Asakura, H.; Hifumi, S.; Jokaji, H.; Saito, M.; Kumabashiri, I.; Uotani, C.; Morishita, E.; Yamazaki, M.; Shibata, K.; Mizuhashi, K.
Prothrombin Fragment F1 + 2 and Thrombin-Antithrombin III Complex Are Useful Markers of the Hypercoagulable State in
Atrial Fibrillation. Blood Coagul. Fibrinolysis Int. J. Haemost. Thromb. 1992, 3, 469–473. [CrossRef]
12. Wu, N.; Tong, S.; Xiang, Y.; Wu, L.; Xu, B.; Zhang, Y.; Ma, X.; Li, Y.; Song, Z.; Zhong, L. Association of Hemostatic Markers with
Atrial Fibrillation: A Meta-Analysis and Meta-Regression. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0124716. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Ohara, K.; Inoue, H.; Nozawa, T.; Hirai, T.; Iwasa, A.; Okumura, K.; Lee, J.-D.; Shimizu, A.; Hayano, M.; Yano, K. Accumulation of
Risk Factors Enhances the Prothrombotic State in Atrial Fibrillation. Int. J. Cardiol. 2008, 126, 316–321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Siegbahn, A.; Oldgren, J.; Andersson, U.; Ezekowitz, M.D.; Reilly, P .A.; Connolly, S.J.; Yusuf, S.; Wallentin, L.; Eikelboom, J.W.
D-Dimer and Factor VIIa in Atrial Fibrillation—Prognostic Values for Cardiovascular Events and Effects of Anticoagulation
Therapy. A RE-LY Substudy.Thromb. Haemost. 2016, 115, 921–930. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Christersson, C.; Wallentin, L.; Andersson, U.; Alexander, J.H.; Ansell, J.; De Caterina, R.; Gersh, B.J.; Granger, C.B.; Hanna, M.;
Horowitz, J.D.; et al. D-Dimer and Risk of Thromboembolic and Bleeding Events in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation—Observations
from the ARISTOTLE Trial. J. Thromb. Haemost. 2014, 12, 1401–1412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Sakurai, K.; Hirai, T.; Nakagawa, K.; Kameyama, T.; Nozawa, T.; Asanoi, H.; Inoue, H. Left Atrial Appendage Function and
Abnormal Hypercoagulability in Patients with Atrial Flutter. Chest 2003, 124, 1670–1674. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Feinberg, W.M.; Macy, E.; Cornell, E.S.; Nightingale, S.D.; Pearce, L.A.; Tracy, R.P .; Bovill, E.G. Plasmin-Alpha2-Antiplasmin
Complex in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Investigators. Thromb. Haemost. 1999, 82,
100–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Mulder, B.A.; Geelhoed, B.; van der Harst, P .; Spronk, H.M.; Van Gelder, I.C.; Asselbergs, F.W.; Rienstra, M. Plasminogen Activator
Inhibitor-1 and Tissue Plasminogen Activator and Incident AF: Data from the PREVEND Study. Int. J. Cardiol. 2018, 272, 208–210.
[CrossRef]
19. Wu, N.; Chen, X.; Cai, T.; Wu, L.; Xiang, Y.; Zhang, M.; Li, Y.; Song, Z.; Zhong, L. Association of Inﬂammatory and Hemostatic
Markers with Stroke and Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Can. J. Cardiol.
2015, 31, 278–286. [CrossRef]
20. Wang, X.; Xu, X.; Wang, W.; Huang, H.; Liu, F.; Wan, C.; Yao, Q.; Li, H.; Zhang, Z.; Song, Z. Risk Factors Associated with Left
Atrial Appendage Thrombosis in Patients with Non-Valvular Atrial Fibrillation by Transesophageal Echocardiography.Int. J.
Cardiovasc. Imaging 2023, 39, 1263–1273. [CrossRef]
21. Drabik, L.; Wołkow, P .; Undas, A. Fibrin Clot Permeability as a Predictor of Stroke and Bleeding in Anticoagulated Patients with
Atrial Fibrillation. Stroke 2017, 48, 2716–2722. [CrossRef]
22. Baidildinova, G.; Nagy, M.; Jurk, K.; Wild, P .S.; ten Cate, H.; van der Meijden, P .E.J. Soluble Platelet Release Factors as Biomarkers
for Cardiovascular Disease. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 2021, 8, 684920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Swiatkowska, M.; Cierniewska-Cieslak, A.; Pawlowska, Z.; Cierniewski, C.S. Dual Regulatory Effects of Nitric Oxide on
Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor Type 1 Expression in Endothelial Cells. Eur. J. Biochem. 2000, 267, 1001–1007. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
24. Conway, D.S.G.; Pearce, L.A.; Chin, B.S.P .; Hart, R.G.; Lip, G.Y.H. Prognostic Value of Plasma von Willebrand Factor and
Soluble P-Selectin as Indices of Endothelial Damage and Platelet Activation in 994 Patients with Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation.
Circulation 2003, 107, 3141–3145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Chung, M.K.; Martin, D.O.; Sprecher, D.; Wazni, O.; Kanderian, A.; Carnes, C.A.; Bauer, J.A.; Tchou, P .J.; Niebauer, M.J.; Natale,
A.; et al. C-Reactive Protein Elevation in Patients with Atrial Arrhythmias: Inﬂammatory Mechanisms and Persistence of Atrial
Fibrillation. Circulation 2001, 104, 2886–2891. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Watanabe, T.; Takeishi, Y.; Hirono, O.; Itoh, M.; Matsui, M.; Nakamura, K.; Tamada, Y.; Kubota, I. C-Reactive Protein Elevation
Predicts the Occurrence of Atrial Structural Remodeling in Patients with Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation. Heart Vessel. 2005, 20,
45–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Khan, A.A.; Lip, G.Y.H. The Prothrombotic State in Atrial Fibrillation: Pathophysiological and Management Implications.
Cardiovasc. Res. 2019, 115, 31–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 14 of 18
28. Nattel, S.; Burstein, B.; Dobrev, D. Atrial Remodeling and Atrial Fibrillation: Mechanisms and Implications. Circ. Arrhythm.
Electrophysiol. 2008, 1, 62–73. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Wijffels, M.C.; Kirchhof, C.J.; Dorland, R.; Allessie, M.A. Atrial Fibrillation Begets Atrial Fibrillation. A Study in Awake
Chronically Instrumented Goats. Circulation 1995, 92, 1954–1968. [CrossRef]
30. Dittrich, H.C.; Pearce, L.A.; Asinger, R.W.; McBride, R.; Webel, R.; Zabalgoitia, M.; Pennock, G.D.; Safford, R.E.; Rothbart, R.M.;
Halperin, J.L.; et al. Left Atrial Diameter in Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation: An Echocardiographic Study. Am. Heart J. 1999, 137,
494–499. [CrossRef]
31. Sanﬁlippo, A.J.; Abascal, V .M.; Sheehan, M.; Oertel, L.B.; Harrigan, P .; Hughes, R.A.; Weyman, A.E. Atrial Enlargement as a
Consequence of Atrial Fibrillation. A Prospective Echocardiographic Study. Circulation 1990, 82, 792–797. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Vinereanu, D.; Lopes, R.D.; Mulder, H.; Gersh, B.J.; Hanna, M.; de Barros E Silva, P .G.M.; Atar, D.; Wallentin, L.; Granger, C.B.;
Alexander, J.H. Echocardiographic Risk Factors for Stroke and Outcomes in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation Anticoagulated with
Apixaban or Warfarin. Stroke 2017, 48, 3266–3273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Jordan, K.; Yaghi, S.; Poppas, A.; Chang, A.D.; Mac Grory, B.; Cutting, S.; Burton, T.; Jayaraman, M.; Tsivgoulis, G.; Sabeh, M.K.;
et al. Left Atrial Volume Index Is Associated with Cardioembolic Stroke and Atrial Fibrillation Detection After Embolic Stroke of
Undetermined Source. Stroke 2019, 50, 1997–2001. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Yamamoto, M.; Seo, Y.; Kawamatsu, N.; Sato, K.; Sugano, A.; Machino-Ohtsuka, T.; Kawamura, R.; Nakajima, H.; Igarashi, M.;
Sekiguchi, Y.; et al. Complex Left Atrial Appendage Morphology and Left Atrial Appendage Thrombus Formation in Patients
with Atrial Fibrillation. Circ. Cardiovasc. Imaging 2014, 7, 337–343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Brambatti, M.; Connolly, S.J.; Gold, M.R.; Morillo, C.A.; Capucci, A.; Muto, C.; Lau, C.P .; Van Gelder, I.C.; Hohnloser, S.H.; Carlson,
M.; et al. Temporal Relationship between Subclinical Atrial Fibrillation and Embolic Events. Circulation 2014, 129, 2094–2099.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Van den Berg, N.W.E.; Neefs, J.; Kawasaki, M.; Nariswari, F.A.; Wesselink, R.; Fabrizi, B.; Jongejan, A.; Klaver, M.N.; Havenaar,
H.; Hulsman, E.L.; et al. Extracellular Matrix Remodeling Precedes Atrial Fibrillation: Results of the PREDICT-AF Trial. Heart
Rhythm. 2021, 18, 2115–2125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Daccarett, M.; Badger, T.J.; Akoum, N.; Burgon, N.S.; Mahnkopf, C.; Vergara, G.; Kholmovski, E.; McGann, C.J.; Parker, D.;
Brachmann, J.; et al. Association of Left Atrial Fibrosis Detected by Delayed-Enhancement Magnetic Resonance Imaging and the
Risk of Stroke in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2011, 57, 831–838. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Akoum, N.; Fernandez, G.; Wilson, B.; Mcgann, C.; Kholmovski, E.; Marrouche, N. Association of Atrial Fibrosis Quantiﬁed
Using LGE-MRI with Atrial Appendage Thrombus and Spontaneous Contrast on Transesophageal Echocardiography in Patients
with Atrial Fibrillation. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 2013, 24, 1104–1109. [CrossRef]
39. Lankveld, T.; Zeemering, S.; Scherr, D.; Kuklik, P .; Hoffmann, B.A.; Willems, S.; Pieske, B.; Haïssaguerre, M.; Jaïs, P .; Crijns,
H.J.; et al. Atrial Fibrillation Complexity Parameters Derived from Surface ECGs Predict Procedural Outcome and Long-Term
Follow-Up of Stepwise Catheter Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 2016, 9, e003354. [CrossRef]
40. Zeemering, S.; Lankveld, T.A.R.; Bonizzi, P .; Limantoro, I.; Bekkers, S.C.A.M.; Crijns, H.J.G.M.; Schotten, U. The Electrocardiogram
as a Predictor of Successful Pharmacological Cardioversion and Progression of Atrial Fibrillation. Europace 2018, 20, e96–e104.
[CrossRef]
41. Wang, Y.-S.; Chen, G.-Y.; Li, X.-H.; Zhou, X.; Li, Y.-G. Prolonged P-Wave Duration Is Associated with Atrial Fibrillation Recurrence
after Radiofrequency Catheter Ablation: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Int. J. Cardiol. 2017, 227, 355–359. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
42. Kreimer, F.; Backhaus, J.F.; Krogias, C.; Pﬂaumbaum, A.; Mügge, A.; Gotzmann, M. P-Wave Parameters and Their Association
with Thrombi and Spontaneous Echo Contrast in the Left Atrial Appendage.Clin. Cardiol. 2023, 46, 397–406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Maheshwari, A.; Norby, F.L.; Roetker, N.S.; Soliman, E.Z.; Koene, R.J.; Rooney, M.R.; O’Neal, W.T.; Shah, A.M.; Claggett, B.L.;
Solomon, S.D.; et al. Reﬁning Prediction of Atrial Fibrillation–Related Stroke Using the P 2 -CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc Score: ARIC and
MESA. Circulation 2019, 139, 180–191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Mutlu, B.; Karabulut, M.; Eroglu, E.; Tigen, K.; Bayrak, F.; Fotbolcu, H.; Basaran, Y. Fibrillatory Wave Amplitude as a Marker of
Left Atrial and Left Atrial Appendage Function, and a Predictor of Thromboembolic Risk in Patients with Rheumatic Mitral
Stenosis. Int. J. Cardiol. 2003, 91, 179–186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Ganesan, A.N.; Chew, D.P .; Hartshorne, T.; Selvanayagam, J.B.; Aylward, P .E.; Sanders, P .; McGavigan, A.D. The Impact of Atrial
Fibrillation Type on the Risk of Thromboembolism, Mortality, and Bleeding: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Eur. Heart
J. 2016, 37, 1591–1602. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Healey, J.S.; Alings, M.; Ha, A.; Leong-Sit, P .; Birnie, D.H.; de Graaf, J.J.; Freericks, M.; Verma, A.; Wang, J.; Leong, D.; et al.
Subclinical Atrial Fibrillation in Older Patients. Circulation 2017, 136, 1276–1283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Hindricks, G.; Potpara, T.; Dagres, N.; Arbelo, E.; Bax, J.J.; Blomström-Lundqvist, C.; Boriani, G.; Castella, M.; Dan, G.A.; Dilaveris,
P .E.; et al. 2020 ESC Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Atrial Fibrillation Developed in Colaboration with the
European Association of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur. Heart J. 2020, 42, 373–498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Goette, A.; Kalman, J.M.; Aguinaga, L.; Akar, J.; Cabrera, J.A.; Chen, S.A.; Chugh, S.S.; Corradi, D.; D’Avila, A.; Dobrev, D.;
et al. EHRA/HRS/APHRS/SOLAECE Expert Consensus on Atrial Cardiomyopathies: Deﬁnition, Characterization, and Clinical
Implication. EP Eur. 2016, 18, 1455–1490. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 15 of 18
49. Kamel, H.; Longstreth, W.T.J.; Tirschwell, D.L.; Kronmal, R.A.; Broderick, J.P .; Palesch, Y.Y.; Meinzer, C.; Dillon, C.; Ewing, I.;
Spilker, J.A.; et al. The AtRial Cardiopathy and Antithrombotic Drugs in Prevention After Cryptogenic Stroke Randomized Trial:
Rationale and Methods. Int. J. Stroke Off. J. Int. Stroke Soc. 2019, 14, 207–214. [CrossRef]
50. Hart, R.G.; Sharma, M.; Mundl, H.; Kasner, S.E.; Bangdiwala, S.I.; Berkowitz, S.D.; Swaminathan, B.; Lavados, P .; Wang, Y.; Wang,
Y.; et al. Rivaroxaban for Stroke Prevention after Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source. N. Engl. J. Med. 2018, 378, 2191–2201.
[CrossRef]
51. Diener, H.-C.; Sacco, R.L.; Easton, J.D.; Granger, C.B.; Bernstein, R.A.; Uchiyama, S.; Kreuzer, J.; Cronin, L.; Cotton, D.; Grauer, C.;
et al. Dabigatran for Prevention of Stroke after Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source. N. Engl. J. Med. 2019, 380, 1906–1917.
[CrossRef]
52. Alkhouli, M.; Di Biase, L.; Natale, A.; Rihal, C.S.; Holmes, D.R.; Asirvatham, S.; Bartus, K.; Lakkireddy, D.; Friedman, P .A.
Nonthrombogenic Roles of the Left Atrial Appendage: JACC Review Topic of the Week. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2023, 81, 1063–1075.
[CrossRef]
53. Blackshear, J.L.; Odell, J.A. Appendage Obliteration to Reduce Stroke in Cardiac Surgical Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Ann.
Thorac. Surg. 1996, 61, 755–759. [CrossRef]
54. Gwak, D.S.; Choi, W.C.; Kim, Y.W.; Kim, Y.S.; Hwang, Y.H. Impact of Left Atrial Appendage Morphology on Recurrence in
Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source and Atrial Cardiopathy. Front. Neurol. 2021, 12, 679320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Di Biase, L.; Santangeli, P .; Anselmino, M.; Mohanty, P .; Salvetti, I.; Gili, S.; Horton, R.; Sanchez, J.E.; Bai, R.; Mohanty, S.; et al.
Does the Left Atrial Appendage Morphology Correlate with the Risk of Stroke in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation? Results from a
Multicenter Study. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2012, 60, 531–538. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Wu, L.; Liang, E.; Fan, S.; Zheng, L.; Du, Z.; Liu, S.; Hu, F.; Fan, X.; Chen, G.; Ding, L.; et al. Relation of Left Atrial Appendage
Morphology Determined by Computed Tomography to Prior Stroke or to Increased Risk of Stroke in Patients with Atrial
Fibrillation. Am. J. Cardiol. 2019, 123, 1283–1286. [CrossRef]
57. Ernst, G.; Stöllberger, C.; Abzieher, F.; Veit-Dirscherl, W.; Bonner, E.; Bibus, B.; Schneider, B.; Slany, J. Morphology of the Left
Atrial Appendage. Anat. Rec. 1995, 242, 553–561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Taina, M.; Vanninen, R.; Hedman, M.; Jäkälä, P .; Kärkkäinen, S.; Tapiola, T.; Sipola, P . Left Atrial Appendage Volume Increased in
More than Half of Patients with Cryptogenic Stroke. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e79519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Lei, C.; Gao, Q.; Wei, R.; Li, Q.; Liu, X.; Wu, L.; Yao, Y.; Fan, H.; Zheng, Z. Fractal Geometry Illustrated Left Atrial Appendage
Morphology That Predicted Thrombosis and Stroke in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 2022, 9, 779528.
[CrossRef]
60. Khurram, I.M.; Dewire, J.; Mager, M.; Maqbool, F.; Zimmerman, S.L.; Zipunnikov, V .; Beinart, R.; Marine, J.E.; Spragg, D.D.;
Berger, R.D.; et al. Relationship between Left Atrial Appendage Morphology and Stroke in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Heart
Rhythm 2013, 10, 1843–1849. [CrossRef]
61. Bieging, E.T.; Morris, A.; Chang, L.; Dagher, L.; Marrouche, N.F.; Cates, J. Statistical Shape Analysis of the Left Atrial Appendage
Predicts Stroke in Atrial Fibrillation. Int. J. Cardiovasc. Imaging 2021, 37, 2521–2527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Lopez-Candales, A.; Hernandez-Suarez, D.F. Strain Imaging Echocardiography: What Imaging Cardiologists Should Know. Curr.
Cardiol. Rev. 2017, 13, 118–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Saraço˘ glu, E.; Ural, D.; Kılıç, S.; Vuru¸ skan, E.; ¸ Sahin, T.; A˘ gaçdiken A˘ gır, A. Left Atrial Appendage 2D-Strain Assessed by
Transesophageal Echocardiography Is Associated with Thromboembolic Risk in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Turk Kardiyol.
Dern. Ars. Turk Kardiyol. Derneginin Yayin Organidir 2019, 47, 111–121. [CrossRef]
64. Ono, K.; Iwama, M.; Kawasaki, M.; Tanaka, R.; Watanabe, T.; Onishi, N.; Warita, S.; Kojima, T.; Kato, T.; Goto, Y.; et al. Motion of
Left Atrial Appendage as a Determinant of Thrombus Formation in Patients with a Low CHADS2 Score Receiving Warfarin for
Persistent Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation. Cardiovasc. Ultrasound 2012, 10, 50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Su, B.; Sun, S.-K.; Dai, X.-J.; Ma, C.-S.; Zhou, B.-Y. The Novel Left Atrial Appendage Strain Parameters Are Associated with
Thrombosis Risk in Patients with Non-Valvular Atrial Fibrillation. Echocardiogr. Mt. Kisco N 2023, 40, 483–493. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
66. Providência, R.; Faustino, A.; Ferreira, M.J.; Gonçalves, L.; Trigo, J.; Botelho, A.; Barra, S.; Boveda, S. Evaluation of Left Atrial
Deformation to Predict Left Atrial Stasis in Patients with Non-Valvular Atrial Fibrillation—A Pilot-Study. Cardiovasc. Ultrasound
2013, 11, 44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Mao, Y.; Ma, M.; Yang, Y.; Yu, C.; Wang, Y.; Jiang, R.; Jiang, C. Left Atrial Appendage Mechanical Dispersion Provides Incremental
Value for Thromboembolic Risk Stratiﬁcation over CHA2DS2-VASc Score in Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation. Int. J. Cardiol. 2020,
307, 41–47. [CrossRef]
68. Goldman, M.E.; Pearce, L.A.; Hart, R.G.; Zabalgoitia, M.; Asinger, R.W.; Safford, R.; Halperin, J.L. Pathophysiologic Correlates
of Thromboembolism in Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation: I. Reduced Flow Velocity in the Left Atrial Appendage (The Stroke
Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation [SPAF-III] Study). J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. Off. Publ. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 1999, 12, 1080–1087.
[CrossRef]
69. Kamp, O.; Verhorst, P .M.; Welling, R.C.; Visser, C.A. Importance of Left Atrial Appendage Flow as a Predictor of Thromboembolic
Events in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Eur. Heart J. 1999, 20, 979–985. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 16 of 18
70. Handke, M.; Harloff, A.; Hetzel, A.; Olschewski, M.; Bode, C.; Geibel, A. Left Atrial Appendage Flow Velocity as a Quantitative
Surrogate Parameter for Thromboembolic Risk: Determinants and Relationship to Spontaneous Echocontrast and Thrombus
Formation. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. Off. Publ. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 2005, 18, 1366–1372. [CrossRef]
71. Chen, L.; Xu, C.; Chen, W.; Zhang, C. Left Atrial Appendage Oriﬁce Area and Morphology Is Closely Associated with Flow
Velocity in Patients with Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation. BMC Cardiovasc. Disord. 2021, 21, 442. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Paciaroni, M.; Agnelli, G.; Caso, V .; Silvestrelli, G.; Seiffge, D.J.; Engelter, S.; De Marchis, G.M.; Polymeris, A.; Zedde, M.L.; Yaghi,
S.; et al. Causes and Risk Factors of Cerebral Ischemic Events in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation Treated with Non-Vitamin K
Antagonist Oral Anticoagulants for Stroke Prevention: The RENo Study. Stroke 2019, 50, 2168–2174. [CrossRef]
73. Castellani, C.; Gao, Y.; Kim, H.; Thompson, C.; Ning, J.; Lohr, N.; Welsh, A.; Berger, M. Left Atrial Appendage Structural
Characteristics Predict Thrombus Formation. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 2023, 34, 1683–1689. [CrossRef]
74. Lee, J.M.; Seo, J.; Uhm, J.-S.; Kim, Y.J.I.N.; Lee, H.-J.; Kim, J.-Y.; Sung, J.-H.; Pak, H.-N.; Lee, M.-H.; Joung, B. Why Is Left Atrial
Appendage Morphology Related to Strokes? An Analysis of the Flow Velocity and Oriﬁce Size of the Left Atrial Appendage. J.
Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 2015, 26, 922–927. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Nakagami, H.; Yamamoto, K.; Ikeda, U.; Mitsuhashi, T.; Goto, T.; Shimada, K. Mitral Regurgitation Reduces the Risk of Stroke in
Patients with Nonrheumatic Atrial Fibrillation. Am. Heart J. 1998, 136, 528–532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Blackshear, J.L.; Pearce, L.A.; Asinger, R.W.; Dittrich, H.C.; Goldman, M.E.; Zabalgoitia, M.; Rothbart, R.M.; Halperin, J.L. Mitral
Regurgitation Associated with Reduced Thromboembolic Events in High-Risk Patients with Nonrheumatic Atrial Fibrillation.
Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Investigators. Am. J. Cardiol. 1993, 72, 840–843. [CrossRef]
77. Bisson, A.; Bernard, A.; Bodin, A.; Clementy, N.; Babuty, D.; Lip, G.Y.H.; Fauchier, L. Stroke and Thromboembolism in Patients
with Atrial Fibrillation and Mitral Regurgitation. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 2019, 12, e006990. [CrossRef]
78. Pisters, R.; Lane, D.A.; Marin, F.; Camm, A.J.; Lip, G.Y.H. Stroke and Thromboembolism in Atrial Fibrillation.Circ. J. Off. J. Jpn.
Circ. Soc. 2012, 76, 2289–2304. [CrossRef]
79. Uzi˛ ebło-˙Zyczkowska, B.; Krzesi ´ nski, P .; Jurek, A.; Kapłon-Cie´ slicka, A.; Gorczyca, I.; Budnik, M.; Gielerak, G.; Kiliszek, M.;
Gawałko, M.; Scisło, P .; et al. Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction Is Associated with the Risk of Thrombus in the Left Atrial
Appendage in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Cardiovasc. Ther. 2020, 2020, 3501749. [CrossRef]
80. Atrial Fibrillation Investigators: Atrial Fibrillation Anticoagulation Study; European Atrial Fibrillation Study; Stroke Prevention
in Atrial Fibrillation Study; Boston Area Anticoagulation Trial for Atrial Fibrillation Study; Canadian Atrial Fibrillation Study;
Veterans Affairs Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Study. Echocardiographic Predictors of Stroke in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation:
A Prospective Study of 1066 Patients from 3 Clinical Trials. Arch. Intern. Med. 1998, 158, 1316–1320. [CrossRef]
81. Demirkiran, A.; Hassell, M.E.C.J.; Garg, P .; Elbaz, M.S.M.; Delewi, R.; Greenwood, J.P .; Piek, J.J.; Plein, S.; van der Geest, R.J.;
Nijveldt, R. Left Ventricular Four-Dimensional Blood Flow Distribution, Energetics, and Vorticity in Chronic Myocardial Infarction
Patients with/without Left Ventricular Thrombus. Eur. J. Radiol. 2022, 150, 110233. [CrossRef]
82. Markl, M.; Lee, D.C.; Furiasse, N.; Carr, M.; Foucar, C.; Ng, J.; Carr, J.; Goldberger, J.J. Left Atrial and Left Atrial Appendage 4D
Blood Flow Dynamics in Atrial Fibrillation. Circ. Cardiovasc. Imaging 2016, 9, e004984. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Cha, M.J.; An, D.-G.; Kang, M.; Kim, H.M.; Kim, S.-W.; Cho, I.; Hong, J.; Choi, H.; Cho, J.-H.; Shin, S.Y.; et al. Correct Closure of
the Left Atrial Appendage Reduces Stagnant Blood Flow and the Risk of Thrombus Formation: A Proof-of-Concept Experimental
Study Using 4D Flow Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Korean J. Radiol. 2023, 24, 647–659. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Bäck, S.; Henriksson, L.; Bolger, A.F.; Carlhäll, C.-J.; Persson, A.; Karlsson, M.; Ebbers, T. Assessment of Transmitral and Left
Atrial Appendage Flow Rate from Cardiac 4D-CT. Commun. Med. 2023, 3, 22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Rigatelli, G.; Zuin, M.; Roncon, L. Increased Blood Residence Time as Markers of High-Risk Patent Foramen Ovale. Transl. Stroke
Res. 2023, 14, 304–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Fang, R.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Chen, Q.; Liu, Q.; Li, Z. Impact of Left Atrial Appendage Location on Risk of Thrombus Formation in
Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 2021, 20, 1431–1443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Durán, E.; García-Villalba, M.; Martínez-Legazpi, P .; Gonzalo, A.; McVeigh, E.; Kahn, A.M.; Bermejo, J.; Flores, O.; DelÁlamo,
J.C. Pulmonary Vein Flow Split Effects in Patient-Speciﬁc Simulations of Left Atrial Flow. Comput. Biol. Med. 2023, 163, 107128.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. Pons, M.I.; Mill, J.; Fernandez-Quilez, A.; Olivares, A.L.; Silva, E.; De Potter, T.; Camara, O. Joint Analysis of Morphological
Parameters and In Silico Haemodynamics of the Left Atrial Appendage for Thrombogenic Risk Assessment. J. Interv. Cardiol.
2022, 2022, 9125224. [CrossRef]
89. Bartus, K.; Litwinowicz, R.; Natorska, J.; Zabczyk, M.; Undas, A.; Kapelak, B.; Lakkireddy, D.; Lee, R.J. Coagulation Factors and
Fibrinolytic Activity in the Left Atrial Appendage and Other Heart Chambers in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation: Is There a Local
Intracardiac Prothrombotic State? (HEART-CLOT Study). Int. J. Cardiol. 2020, 301, 103–107. [CrossRef]
90. Xu, B.; Du, Y.; Xu, C.; Sun, Y.; Peng, F.; Wang, S.; Pan, J.; Lou, Y.; Xing, Y. Left Atrial Appendage Morphology and Local
Thrombogenesis-Related Blood Parameters in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2021, 10, e020406. [CrossRef]
91. Tóth, N.K.; Csanádi, Z.; Hajas, O.; Kiss, A.; Nagy-Baló, E.; Kovács, K.B.; Sarkady, F.; Muszbek, L.; Bereczky, Z.; Csiba, L.; et al.
Intracardiac Hemostasis and Fibrinolysis Parameters in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. BioMed Res. Int. 2017, 2017, 3678017.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 17 of 18
92. Litwinowicz, R.; Natorska, J.; Zabczyk, M.; Kapelak, B.; Lakkireddy, D.; Vuddanda, V .; Bartus, K. Changes in Fibrinolytic Activity
and Coagulation Factors after Epicardial Left Atrial Appendage Closure in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. J. Thorac. Dis. 2020,
14, 4226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Cai, H.; Li, Z.; Goette, A.; Mera, F.; Honeycutt, C.; Feterik, K.; Wilcox, J.N.; Dudley, S.C.J.; Harrison, D.G.; Langberg, J.J.
Downregulation of Endocardial Nitric Oxide Synthase Expression and Nitric Oxide Production in Atrial Fibrillation: Potential
Mechanisms for Atrial Thrombosis and Stroke. Circulation 2002, 106, 2854–2858. [CrossRef]
94. Camen, S.; Ojeda, F.M.; Niiranen, T.; Gianfagna, F.; Vishram-Nielsen, J.K.; Costanzo, S.; Söderberg, S.; Vartiainen, E.; Donati,
M.B.; Løchen, M.-L.; et al. Temporal Relations between Atrial Fibrillation and Ischaemic Stroke and Their Prognostic Impact on
Mortality. EP Eur. 2020, 22, 522–529. [CrossRef]
95. Daoud, E.G.; Glotzer, T.V .; Wyse, D.G.; Ezekowitz, M.D.; Hilker, C.; Koehler, J.; Ziegler, P .D. Temporal Relationship of Atrial
Tachyarrhythmias, Cerebrovascular Events, and Systemic Emboli Based on Stored Device Data: A Subgroup Analysis of TRENDS.
Heart Rhythm 2011, 8, 1416–1423. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Singer, D.E.; Ziegler, P .D.; Koehler, J.L.; Sarkar, S.; Passman, R.S. Temporal Association Between Episodes of Atrial Fibrillation
and Risk of Ischemic Stroke. JAMA Cardiol. 2021, 6, 1364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Turakhia, M.P .; Ziegler, P .D.; Schmitt, S.K.; Chang, Y.; Fan, J.; Than, C.T.; Keung, E.K.; Singer, D.E. Atrial Fibrillation Burden and
Short-Term Risk of Stroke: Case-Crossover Analysis of Continuously Recorded Heart Rhythm From Cardiac Electronic Implanted
Devices. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 2015, 8, 1040–1047. [CrossRef]
98. Kirchhof, P .; Toennis, T.; Goette, A.; Camm, A.J.; Diener, H.C.; Becher, N.; Bertaglia, E.; Blomstrom Lundqvist, C.; Borlich, M.;
Brandes, A.; et al. Anticoagulation with Edoxaban in Patients with Atrial High-Rate Episodes. N. Engl. J. Med. 2023, 389,
1167–1179. [CrossRef]
99. Ambrosio, G.; Camm, A.J.; Bassand, J.-P .; Corbalan, R.; Kayani, G.; Carluccio, E.; Mantovani, L.G.; Virdone, S.; Kakkar, A.K.;
GARFIELD-AF Investigators. Characteristics, treatment, and outcomes of newly diagnosed atrial ﬁbrillation patients with heart
failure: GARFIELD-AF. ESC Heart Fail. 2021, 8, 1139–1149. [CrossRef]
100. Lip, G.Y.H.; Nieuwlaat, R.; Pisters, R.; Lane, D.A.; Crijns, H.J.G.M.; Andresen, D.; Camm, A.J.; Davies, W.; Capucci, A.; Olsson, B.;
et al. Reﬁning Clinical Risk Stratiﬁcation for Predicting Stroke and Thromboembolism in Atrial Fibrillation Using a Novel Risk
Factor-Based Approach: The Euro Heart Survey on Atrial Fibrillation. Chest 2010, 137, 263–272. [CrossRef]
101. Szymanski, F.M.; Lip, G.Y.H.; Filipiak, K.J.; Platek, A.E.; Hrynkiewicz-Szymanska, A.; Opolski, G. Stroke Risk Factors Beyond the
CHA2DS2-VASc Score: Can We Improve Our Identiﬁcation of “High Stroke Risk” Patients with Atrial Fibrillation? Am. J. Cardiol.
2015, 116, 1781–1788. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Friberg, L.; Benson, L.; Lip, G.Y.H. Balancing Stroke and Bleeding Risks in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation and Renal Failure: The
Swedish Atrial Fibrillation Cohort Study. Eur. Heart J. 2015, 36, 297–306. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Bonde, A.N.; Lip, G.Y.H.; Kamper, A.-L.; Hansen, P .R.; Lamberts, M.; Hommel, K.; Hansen, M.L.; Gislason, G.H.; Torp-Pedersen,
C.; Olesen, J.B. Net Clinical Beneﬁt of Antithrombotic Therapy in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation and Chronic Kidney Disease. J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2014, 64, 2471–2482. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Segan, L.; Nanayakkara, S.; Spear, E.; Shirwaiker, A.; Chieng, D.; Prabhu, S.; Sugumar, H.; Ling, L.; Kaye, D.M.; Kalman, J.M.;
et al. Identifying Patients at High Risk of Left Atrial Appendage Thrombus Before Cardioversion: The CLOTS-AF Score. J. Am.
Heart Assoc. 2023, 12, e029259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Piccini, J.P .; Stevens, S.R.; Chang, Y.; Singer, D.E.; Lokhnygina, Y.; Go, A.S.; Patel, M.R.; Mahaffey, K.W.; Halperin, J.L.; Breithardt,
G.; et al. Renal Dysfunction as a Predictor of Stroke and Systemic Embolism in Patients With Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation:
Validation of the R 2 CHADS 2 Index in the ROCKET AF (Rivaroxaban Once-Daily, Oral, Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared
with Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation) and ATRIA (AnTicoagulation and
Risk Factors In Atrial Fibrillation) Study Cohorts. Circulation 2013, 127, 224–232. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Chao, T.-F.; Lin, Y.-J.; Chang, S.-L.; Lo, L.-W.; Hu, Y.-F.; Tuan, T.-C.; Liao, J.-N.; Chung, F.-P .; Hsieh, M.-H.; Chen, S.-A. R2CHADS2
Score and Thromboembolic Events After Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation in Comparison with the CHA2DS2-VASc Score.
Can. J. Cardiol. 2014, 30, 405–412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Singer, D.E.; Chang, Y.; Borowsky, L.H.; Fang, M.C.; Pomernacki, N.K.; Udaltsova, N.; Reynolds, K.; Go, A.S. A New Risk Scheme
to Predict Ischemic Stroke and Other Thromboembolism in Atrial Fibrillation: The ATRIA Study Stroke Risk Score. J. Am. Heart
Assoc. 2013, 2, e000250. [CrossRef]
108. Fox, K.A.A.; Lucas, J.E.; Pieper, K.S.; Bassand, J.-P .; Camm, A.J.; Fitzmaurice, D.A.; Goldhaber, S.Z.; Goto, S.; Haas, S.; Hacke, W.;
et al. Improved Risk Stratiﬁcation of Patients with Atrial Fibrillation: An Integrated GARFIELD-AF Tool for the Prediction of
Mortality, Stroke and Bleed in Patients with and without Anticoagulation. BMJ Open 2017, 7, e017157. [CrossRef]
109. Bassand, J.-P .; Accetta, G.; Al Mahmeed, W.; Corbalan, R.; Eikelboom, J.; Fitzmaurice, D.A.; Fox, K.A.A.; Gao, H.; Goldhaber, S.Z.;
Goto, S.; et al. Risk Factors for Death, Stroke, and Bleeding in 28,628 Patients from the GARFIELD-AF Registry: Rationale for
Comprehensive Management of Atrial Fibrillation. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0191592. [CrossRef]
110. Zhu, W.; Fu, L.; Ding, Y.; Huang, L.; Xu, Z.; Hu, J.; Hong, K. Meta-Analysis of ATRIA versus CHA2DS2-VASc for Predicting
Stroke and Thromboembolism in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Int. J. Cardiol. 2017, 227, 436–442. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 6491 18 of 18
111. Essien, U.R.; Chiswell, K.; Kaltenbach, L.A.; Wang, T.Y.; Fonarow, G.C.; Thomas, K.L.; Turakhia, M.P .; Benjamin, E.J.; Rodriguez, F.;
Fang, M.C.; et al. Association of Race and Ethnicity with Oral Anticoagulation and Associated Outcomes in Patients With Atrial
Fibrillation: Findings From the Get With The Guidelines–Atrial Fibrillation Registry. JAMA Cardiol. 2022, 7, 1207. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
112. Calvert, P .; Tamirisa, K.; Al-Ahmad, A.; Lip, G.Y.H.; Gupta, D. Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Stroke Prevention for Atrial
Fibrillation. Am. J. Med. 2023, 136, 225–233. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Kabra, R.; Girotra, S.; Vaughan Sarrazin, M. Reﬁning Stroke Prediction in Atrial Fibrillation Patients by Addition of African-
American Ethnicity to CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc Score. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2016, 68, 461–470. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Overvad, T.F.; Rasmussen, L.H.; Skjøth, F.; Overvad, K.; Lip, G.Y.H.; Larsen, T.B. Body Mass Index and Adverse Events in Patients
with Incident Atrial Fibrillation. Am. J. Med. 2013, 126, 640.e9–640.e17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Yaranov, D.M.; Smyrlis, A.; Usatii, N.; Butler, A.; Petrini, J.R.; Mendez, J.; Warshofsky, M.K. Effect of Obstructive Sleep Apnea on
Frequency of Stroke in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Am. J. Cardiol. 2015, 115, 461–465. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Szymanski, F.M.; Filipiak, K.J.; Platek, A.E.; Hrynkiewicz-Szymanska, A.; Karpinski, G.; Opolski, G. Assessment of CHADS2 and
CHA2DS2-VASc Scores in Obstructive Sleep Apnea Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Sleep Breath. 2015, 19, 531–537. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
117. Verdecchia, P .; Porcellati, C.; Reboldi, G.; Gattobigio, R.; Borgioni, C.; Pearson, T.A.; Ambrosio, G. Left Ventricular Hypertrophy as
an Independent Predictor of Acute Cerebrovascular Events in Essential Hypertension.Circulation 2001, 104, 2039–2044. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
118. Yaghi, S.; Kamel, H. Stratifying Stroke Risk in Atrial Fibrillation: Beyond Clinical Risk Scores. Stroke 2017, 48, 2665–2670.
[CrossRef]
119. Cai, Y.; Xiong, Q.; Chen, S.; Jiang, X.; Liao, J.; Chen, W.; Zou, L.; Su, L.; Zhu, Y.; Yin, Y.; et al. Left Atrial Appendage Thrombus in
Patients with Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation before Catheter Ablation and Cardioversion: Risk Factors beyond the CHA2DS2-
VASc Score. J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2022, 9, 46. [CrossRef]
120. Malik, V .; Ganesan, A.N.; Selvanayagam, J.B.; Chew, D.P .; McGavigan, A.D. Is Atrial Fibrillation a Stroke Risk Factor or Risk
Marker? An Appraisal Using the Bradford Hill Framework for Causality. Heart Lung Circ. 2020, 29, 86–93. [CrossRef]
121. Friberg, L.; Rosenqvist, M.; Lip, G.Y.H. Evaluation of Risk Stratiﬁcation Schemes for Ischaemic Stroke and Bleeding in 182 678
Patients with Atrial Fibrillation: The Swedish Atrial Fibrillation Cohort Study. Eur. Heart J. 2012, 33, 1500–1510. [CrossRef]
122. Chao, T.-F.; Liao, J.-N.; Tuan, T.-C.; Lin, Y.-J.; Chang, S.-L.; Lo, L.-W.; Hu, Y.-F.; Chung, F.-P .; Chen, T.-J.; Lip, G.Y.H.; et al. Incident
Co-Morbidities in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation Initially with a CHA2DS2-VASc Score of 0 (Males) or 1 (Females): Implications
for Reassessment of Stroke Risk in Initially ‘Low-Risk’ Patients.Thromb. Haemost. 2019, 119, 1162–1170. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.