ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Pathologist-initiated reﬂex testing for biomarkers in non-small-cell lung
cancer: expert consensus on the rationale and considerations for
implementation
J. R. Gosney 1, L. Paz-Ares 2, P . Jänne3, K. M. Kerr 4, N. B. Leighl 5, M. D. Lozano 6, U. Malapelle 7, T. Mok 8, B. S. Shef ﬁeld9,
A. Tufman10,11,12, I. I. Wistuba 13,14 & S. Peters 15/C3
1Department of Cellular Pathology, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, UK; 2Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, H12O-CNIO Lung Cancer Unit, Ciberonc
and Complutense University, Madrid, Spain; 3Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA; 4School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK; 5Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada; 6Pathology, Universidad de Navarra-Clínica Universidad de Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain; 7Department of Public Health, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy; 8Department of Clinical Oncology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China; 9Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, William Osler Health System, Brampton, Canada; 10Department of Internal Medicine V,
Thoracic Oncology Centre Munich, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich; 11Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich (CPC-M), Munich; 12German Center for Lung
Research (DZL), Munich, Germany; Departments of 13Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology; 14Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA; 15Department of Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland
Available online 23 June 2023
Biomarker tests in lung cancer have been traditionally ordered by the treating oncologist upon con ﬁrmation of an
appropriate pathological diagnosis. The delay this introduces prolongs yet further what is already a complex, multi-
stage, pre-treatment pathway and delays the start of ﬁrst-line systemic treatment, which is crucially informed by
the results of such analysis. Re ﬂex testing, in which the responsibility for testing for an agreed range of biomarkers
lies with the pathologist, has been shown to standardise and expedite the process. Twelve experts discussed the
rationale and considerations for implementing re ﬂex testing as standard clinical practice.
Key words: reﬂex testing, non-small-cell lung cancer, NSCLC, predictive biomarkers, turnaround time, molecular
pathology
INTRODUCTION
The management and treatment of patients with non-small-
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have evolved rapidly over recent
years owing to the progressive increase in the availability of
different targeted therapies and novel immunotherapies,
which have dramatically improved response rates and sur-
vival in patients with metastatic disease. The advent of such
targeted therapies has made biomarker testing an essential
prerequisite for guiding optimal ﬁrst-line systemic therapy.
More recently, the introduction of targeted therapy in the
adjuvant setting has meant that biomarker testing is also
becoming important for clinical decision making in early-
stage disease. As the number of targeted therapies inexo-
rably increases, so will the demand for timely clinical
investigation of numerous biomarkers across multiple
different genes. According to the recent international
guidelines, treatment of metastatic non-squamous NSCLC
should be guided by the genomic evaluation of mutations
and fusions such as epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK), ROS proto-
oncogene 1 receptor tyrosine kinase ( ROS1), v-raf murine
sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B ( BRAF), neurotrophic
tyrosine receptor kinase ( NTRK), rearranged during trans-
fection ( RET), Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog
(KRAS) and MET proto-oncogene, receptor tyrosine kinase
(MET), and by assessment of the expression of programmed
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
1-4
Given that these tests are a fundamental requirement in
the management of patients with NSCLC, reliable processes
and methods are required to ensure they are carried out in
every appropriate case and that the results are available to
the treating oncologist in time to permit planning of
treatment for every patient.
Traditionally, the ordering of biomarker tests has been a
matter for the treating oncologist, who would consider
which were necessary for each individual patient based on
the histological diagnosis made by a pathologist and then
order those tests. A major problem with this traditional,
oncologist-led pathway is that it delays the initiation of
*Correspondence to: Dr Solange Peters, Department of Oncology, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Rue de Bugnon 46, CH-1011, Lau-
sanne, Switzerland. Tel: þ41-21-314-44-62
E-mail: solange.peters@chuv.ch (S. Peters).
2059-7029/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Eu-
ropean Society for Medical Oncology. This is an open access article under the CC
BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 1
complex and often lengthy testing procedures and, there-
fore, delays the availability of the information necessary to
inform therapy.5,6 Because there is a risk of clinical deteri-
oration while waiting for the results of biomarker tests,
delays in test reporting can lead to the initiation of sub-
optimal therapy before determining complete biomarker
status.
7 Long test turnaround times may also deter clinicians
from ordering biomarker tests. 8,9 A retrospective review of
1203 patients with pulmonary adenocarcinoma reported
that the percentage of tumours tested for EGFR mutation
was 54%, ALK mutation 51%, ROS1 mutation 43%, BRAF
mutation 29%, RET mutation 17%, MET exon 14 skipping
15% and Erb-B2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 ( ERBB2)
mutation 11%.
10
Implementation of re ﬂex testing is one potential way to
reduce the time from diagnosis to the delivery of all clini-
cally actionable biomarker results while also helping to
ensure more patients are tested. A roundtable meeting of
12 experts with an even distribution of oncologists and
pathologists was convened in May 2022 to discuss the
prospect of re ﬂex testing becoming the new standard in
clinical practice. The present article presents a summary
statement of the expert working group.
THE CASE FOR CHANGE dREFLEX TESTING, A NEW
STANDARD OF CARE
Reﬂex testing is an approach to testing in which the
pathologist handling the case is responsible for initiating
and controlling testing for a set of prespeci ﬁed biomarkers,
agreed upon within the context of the multidisciplinary
team (MDT), but without the need for a formal request
from an oncologist.
11 This approach was recommended in
the earliest days of genomic pro ﬁling of NSCLC,12,13 and was
established as standard practice in some centres at this
time. It is still by no means universally practised, however,
and the case for it continues to be made, as in a recent
publication,
14 which makes a strong argument for it from
the point of view of seeking EGFR mutations in particular.
The case for re ﬂex testing, therefore, has clearly not yet
been universally accepted.
Reﬂex testing allows biomarker testing to begin as soon
as the pathological diagnosis is con ﬁrmed, rather than
waiting until after the patient ’s ﬁrst post-biopsy appoint-
ment with the oncologist or after discussion by the MDT. 15
Reﬂex testing has several attributes that make it the
optimal approach for ordering biomarker tests in patients
with NSCLC. Firstly, through the application of a protocol
deﬁned by the MDT, re ﬂex testing ensures that all patients
with NSCLC are guaranteed optimal care at a local level
regarding the extent of biomarker evaluation. Unlike the
traditional oncologist-led testing pathway, which depends
on clinical consideration by the oncologist, a re ﬂex testing
protocol depends on testing ordered routinely immediately
after pathological con ﬁrmation of the diagnosis. This means
that the ordering process is systematic and bypasses com-
plexities of clinical consideration that might otherwise in-
ﬂuence the decision on which tests to request. As a result of
this, fewer patients are overlooked for testing, creating a
more systematic and equitable system. Additionally, several
socioeconomic and racial factors might create signi ﬁcant
disparities in the cancer journey, including and starting with
biomarker testing.
16 In real-world studies, the absolute
number of patients being tested and, crucially, the overall
mutation detection rate increased after the introduction of
reﬂex testing.
17-21 Reﬂex testing is expeditious, reducing
both turnaround time and the time to optimal ﬁrst-line
systemic therapy.6,17,22
Accelerating the time to initiating ﬁrst-line treatment is
clinically important. Patients with untreated advanced NSCLC
can deteriorate rapidly, becoming too ill for therapy or even
dying before treatment is initiated.
23 Expediting biomarker
testing can help to minimise the risk of such situations
signiﬁcantly, while reducing the additional costs associated
with delayed care.
24 Reﬂex testing of patients with early-
stage, resectable disease is now also vital. The data that
continue to emerge from the ADAURA trial, for example,25 in
which adjuvant therapy is applicable to even stage 1b dis-
ease, make clear the importance of seeking EGFR mutations
as early as possible in either the resected tumour or, ideally,
presurgical specimens if available, and targeted therapies are
now becoming established in the neoadjuvant setting.
The expert working group also discussed how reﬂex testing
facilitates and optimises tissue stewardship, a key factor for
the successful completion of biomarker testing in NSCLC,
where the amount of material available for testing is often
very limited. The traditional two-stage diagnostic and testing
pathwaydin which initial assessment and diagnosis by a
non-specialist pathologist in a community hospital is followed
by referral to a specialist thoracic pathologist, usually in an
academic centre, who continues the process ddoes not
facilitate optimal handling of precious material.
26 After
adopting a re ﬂex testing protocol, one study observed
signiﬁcantly fewer unsuccessful tests for EGFR mutations and
ALK fusions (14% before adoption versus 4% after and 17%
before adoption versus 3% after , respectively).17 In addition,
optimising tissue stewardship and increasing successful
analysis of the initial diagnostic specimen will inevitably
reduce the unwelcome requirement for a second biopsy.
The expert working group recognised that one of the
barriers to the adoption of re ﬂex testing is concern over the
potentially high cost, given that such testing is not generally
stratiﬁed according to clinical features such as stage,
smoking history and performance status, nor by imaging;
such information is generally not available to the patholo-
gist guiding the analysis. Inevitably, this means that there is
potential for testing that might be deemed unnecessary or
inappropriate. In the context of current targeted adjuvant
therapy approaches, and the expectation that the use of
targeted therapies before stage IV (including in the neo-
adjuvant setting) will continue to expand, the argument
that re ﬂex testing algorithms lead to over-testing in early-
stage disease loses traction.
In addition, any potential ﬁnancial disadvantage must be
weighed against the advantages already outlined and also
considered in the context of the overall cost of managing a
ESMO Open J. R. Gosney et al.
2 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023
patient with lung cancer. For a patient whose tumour has a
genomic driver or a high level of PD-L1 expression rendering
it responsive to immunotherapy, treatment might extend
life for many months or even years, over which time the
cost of this successful therapy is considerable. As more
targets emerge and more drugs active against them are
developed, survival will continue to lengthen. The cost of
carrying out a range of predictive biomarker tests, especially
if next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based and even if
repeated, is already minute as a proportion of the overall
cost, and will diminish increasingly as we move into the
future.
Another counter to the challenge that re ﬂex testing might
incur unnecessary costs is the increasing availability of NGS,
which is quickly becoming preferred over ‘single-gene’ po-
lymerase chain reaction-based analysis for biomarker testing
of patients with NSCLC.
27 NGS is considered less time-
consuming and ﬁnancially less demanding than single-gene
testing when a number of genomic alterations are being
sought as is increasingly the case for NSCLC. 28,29
Reimbursement of cost also impedes the adoption of
reﬂex testing. Reimbursement practices differ by country
and may be limited and/or constrained to speci ﬁcr e -
quirements. For example, reimbursement may be predi-
cated on documented disease stage, or it might be
mandated that the order for a particular test or tests comes
only from a treating physician. However, it might be
possible to navigate this barrier within the MDT by, for
example, agreeing on a ‘standing order ’ (remaining disease
stage agnostic) for a particular range of tests effectively
ordered by the oncologist and instigated automatically by
the pathologist, which might evolve over time.
Finally, the argument is sometimes made that the results
of biomarker testing on an initial diagnostic specimen might
be irrelevant as disease advances and the tumour evolves,
developing new genomic alterations and changing its
response to immune attack as evidenced by expression of
PD-L1. The opinion of the group, however, is that this should
be viewed not as an argument against testing the initial
diagnostic specimen but as one for routine re-biopsy on
progression. In the speci ﬁc case of addictive oncogenic
drivers, e.g. EGFR mutation and ALK fusion genes, these are
almost always truncal and do not evolve during disease
progression; therefore, the status of these markers, at least
in the initial sample, is likely to be relevant to relapsed
disease. Nonetheless, biopsy at progression is valuable for
other reasons.
DEFINING THE PROTOCOL FOR REFLEX TESTING
Appropriate implementation of re ﬂex testing must be gov-
erned by the availability of a protocol that clearly de ﬁnes
which diagnoses would drive the ordering of biomarker
tests and which tests are to be ordered. The details of the
protocol will be institution-speci ﬁc and are a matter for
agreement among the MDT, comprising representatives
from a range of specialties including pathology, oncology,
surgery and radiology.
The expert working group recommends a stage-agnostic
reﬂex testing protocol, where all standard and evidence-
based clinically actionable biomarkers are automatically
ordered by the pathologist and tested, usually by a com-
bination of NGS and IHC. This approach would ensure
complete biomarker pro ﬁling, accelerate the time to results
and be cost-effective compared with single-gene testing of
multiple biomarkers.
Subtyping of NSCLC into squamous and non-squamous by
pathologists has been traditional for many years and is
embedded in various guidelines.
4,30-32 It is widely used to
guide which tumours should be analysed for which bio-
markers and the search for mutations and fusions generally
being con ﬁned to non-squamous tumours on the grounds
that they are only very rarely drivers of squamous cell
carcinoma.
33-35 Such subtyping is possible on morphological
grounds alone in w70% of tumours; IHC for thyroid tran-
scription factor-1 and p40 should be employed to make the
distinction in the remainder and should reduce the ‘NSCLC
not otherwise speci ﬁed’ rate to 10% or less. 36,37 The addi-
tional IHC testing required for this distinction does
contribute to attrition of the specimen, but this group of
NSCLCs that are not easily subtyped may still harbour
genomic drivers.
4,31 When IHC is used in this context, pa-
thologists should use only the minimum amount of tissue
required to make the distinction.
36
Ultimately, each institution needs to de ﬁne its own pro-
tocol for re ﬂex testing. Ideally, this should align with inter-
national and, where available, national testing guidelines,
while considering the local situation regarding available tests
and technology, treatment strategies and available resources.
GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTING REFLEX TESTING
MDT agreement on the concept of re ﬂex testing and the
decision to implement
Adopting re ﬂex testing should be an institutional decision
involving close communication between radiology, pulmo-
nology, thoracic surgery, oncology and pathology.
38 This is
needed to ensure that all members of the MDT agree with
the concept and that the three principles of re ﬂex testing
are followed: (i) testing of prede ﬁned biomarkers, (ii) initi-
ated by the pathologist and (iii) upon an appropriate diag-
nosis. Clearly, the thoracic oncologist is likely to take the
lead in discussion and decision making, but all members of
the team should have a sense of engagement and feel that
they have a role to play. Only after the MDT is convinced of
the need to test re ﬂexively can the subtleties of the pro-
tocol (discussed in the section ‘Deﬁning the protocol for
reﬂex testing’)b ed e ﬁned. It is important to remember that
implementing re ﬂex testing does not preclude traditional
oncologist-led testing in cases not covered by the re ﬂex
testing protocol.
Engage with institutional policy makers
The expert working group recommends broader collabora-
tion between not only members of the MDT but also
J. R. Gosney et al. ESMO Open
Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 3
institutional policy makers such as hospital, regional and
national administrations to understand the feasibility of the
protocol that has been de ﬁned and agreed by the MDT in
accordance with local circumstances. In the United States,
for example, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) actually requires that such testing be ordered by the
treating clinician. As such, there is a need for engagement at
the highest levels to encourage ﬂexibility in the conditions
for reimbursement in a particular country; it is important to
ensure policy makers understand the limitations of the
traditional ordering process and the rationale for re ﬂex
testing. Commercial laboratories should also be engaged as
appropriate. A multidisciplinary-led presentation to hospital
and other administrations referring to data in published
literature about how reﬂex testing can improve the quality of
care and reduce costs can facilitate rational and operational
discussions. Showing the cost bene ﬁts in different clinical
departments is essential in justifying a potentially increased
budget within the laboratory. There is evidence available to
help make the case for the improved ef ﬁciency and cost-
effectiveness of re ﬂex testing using NGS compared with
the traditional way of ordering and carrying out biomarker
tests.
6,17-21,23,24,26,27 Ultimately, institutional policy makers
need to be convinced that the proposed protocol for re ﬂex
testing is ef ﬁcient and cost-effective, and engagement with
payers is necessary to secure reimbursement.
Establish roles and responsibilities between the referring
pathologist, specialist thoracic pathologist and molecular
pathologist/scientist
Once institutional policy makers have agreed to the proto-
col, it is important to de ﬁne roles and responsibilities be-
tween the referring pathologist (who has responsibility for
the earliest stewardship of the specimen and must be
aware of the need for its judicious management), the
specialist thoracic pathologist (who is best-placed to
consider how to manage the need for genomic pro ﬁling
with the requirement for other tests such as PD-L1
assessment by IHC) and the molecular pathologist or sci-
entist (who is not always in-house, but may be part of a
centralised, regional or supra-regional molecular testing
facility).
The initial step in any re ﬂex testing protocol is making the
pathological diagnosis, and this responsibility is likely to
remain with the referring pathologist. Although diagnosis of
tumour (sub)-type is the priority, it is imperative that the
referring pathologist does not waste tissue by carrying out
unnecessary diagnostic IHC tests. If there is any doubt about
specimen suf ﬁciency for complete biomarker testing, the
expert working group recommends that an assessment of
sample adequacy should be made by the pathologist in, or
in discussion with, the laboratory carrying out the molecular
tests because sample requirements differ depending on the
testing modality and strategy used. Establishing procedures
for quality control is also crucial.
It is imperative to regularly check whether the re ﬂex
testing protocol is being implemented effectively and
having the desired impact on patient care. The expert
working group recommends establishing a process for
measuring protocol performance such as tracking the per-
centage or number of patients who present to their ﬁrst
oncology visit with a complete set of biomarkers available.
Maintenance of the protocol
Given that change in diagnostics and pro ﬁling of lung cancer
is fast-paced and continually evolving, the expert working
group recommends frequent evaluation of the re ﬂex testing
protocol to ensure it complies with the latest local and in-
ternational guidelines and reimbursement conditions.
CONCLUSION
Biomarker testing is critical to appropriately guide the se-
lection of systemic therapy for NSCLC, in the adjuvant
setting as well as in patients with metastatic disease.
However, patients with lung cancer are often inadequately
tested for biomarkers due to non-standardised ordering
practices and long turnaround times associated with tradi-
tional oncologist-led testing. According to the expert
working group, re ﬂex testing should be regarded as the
optimal strategy for biomarker testing in NSCLC and this is
also the recommendation of recent international
guidelines.
2
The practice of re ﬂex testing must be guided by the
availability of and adherence to a protocol, de ﬁned and
agreed by the MDT, in accordance with local circumstances.
Where possible, comprehensive re ﬂex biomarker testing,
ideally via NGS and IHC, in all patients with an appropriate
NSCLC diagnosis, and irrespective of disease stage, is
recommended.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Medical writing support was funded by AstraZeneca and
provided by Oliver McGurk of Indigo Medical in accordance
with Good Publication Practice 2022.
FUNDING
This work was supported by AstraZeneca (no grant num-
ber). The content represents the views of the authors and
not necessarily those of AstraZeneca.
DISCLOSURES
BSS: all support for the present manuscript eAstraZeneca.
grants or contracts from any entity dAmgen, AstraZeneca,
Bayer, Biocartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cell Marque, Eleva-
tion Oncology, Eli Lily, EMD Serono, Incyte, Janssen, Merck,
Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche, Thermo Fisher, Turning Point Ther-
apeutics. Consulting fees dAmgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer,
Biocartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cell Marque, Elevation
Oncology, Eli Lily, EMD Serono, Incyte, Janssen, Merck,
Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche, Thermo Fisher, Turning Point Ther-
apeutics. Payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations,
speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational even-
tsdAmgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biocartis, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Cell Marque, Elevation Oncology, Eli Lily, EMD
ESMO Open J. R. Gosney et al.
4 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023
Serono, Incyte, Janssen, Merck, Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche,
Thermo Fisher, Turning Point Therapeutics. IIW: all support
for the present manuscript dAstraZeneca. Grants or con-
tracts from any entity dpersonal fees: Asuragen, Gen-
entech/Roche, Bristol Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca/
MedImmune, HTG Molecular, Merck, Guardant Health.
Consulting fees dAstraZeneca/MedImmune, Asuragen,
Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Genentech/Roche,
GlaxoSmithKline, Guardant Health, HTG Molecular
Diagnostics, Merck, MSD Oncology, OncoCyte, Novartis,
Flame Inc., P ﬁzer, Regeneron, Merus. Other ﬁnancial or
non-ﬁnancial interests dpersonal fees: GlaxoSmithKline,
OncoCyte, Daiichi Sankyo, Roche, AstraZeneca, P ﬁzer, Bayer;
research funding to institution: 4D Molecular Therapeutics,
Adaptimmune, Adaptive Biotechnologies, Akoya Bio-
sciences, Amgen, Bayer, EMD Serono, Genentech, Guardant
Health, HTG Molecular Diagnostics, Lovance Bio-
therapeutics, Johnson & Johnson, Karus Therapeutics,
MedImmune, Merck, Novartis, OncoPlex Diagnostics, P ﬁzer,
Takeda, Novartis. AT: all support for the present manu-
scriptdAstraZeneca. Consulting fees dpersonal fees: Lilly,
Boehringer Ingelheim, P ﬁzer, Takeda, Roche, AstraZeneca,
Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Amgen, Janssen. Payment or honoraria for
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript
writing or educational events dpersonal fees: Lilly, Boeh-
ringer Ingelheim, P ﬁzer, Takeda, Roche, AstraZeneca,
Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol
Myers Squibb. Participation on a Data Safety Monitoring
Board or Advisory Board dAstraZeneca (COMPEL study) and
AIO (ROSE study). Leadership or ﬁduciary role in other
board, society, committee or advocacy group, paid or
unpaiddleadership roles (unpaid): AIO, ERS, TZM. Other
ﬁnancial or non- ﬁnancial interests dresearch funding:
AstraZeneca, Takeda, Celgene. JRG: all support for the
present manuscriptdAstraZeneca. Grants or contracts from
any entity dMedical Research Council (MRC), Eli Lilly and
Company, AstraZeneca. Consulting fees dAbbVie, Amgen,
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Janssen, Eli Lilly and Company, Merck Sharp &
Dohme, Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche, Sano ﬁ, Takeda Oncology.
Payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers
bureaus, manuscript writing or educational even-
tsdpersonal fees: AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca Bayer,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Diaceutics,
Janssen, Eli Lilly and Company, Merck Sharp & Dohme,
Novartis, Pﬁzer, Roche, Sanoﬁ, Takeda Oncology. Support for
attending meetings and/or travel dTakeda Oncology.
Leadership or ﬁduciary role in other board, society, com-
mittee or advocacy group, paid or unpaid dAssociation of
Pulmonary Pathologists, President. KMK: all support for the
present manuscript dAstraZeneca. Consulting
feesdAstraZeneca, Amgen, Diaceutics, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Debiopharm, Merck
Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche,
Janssen, Sanoﬁ, AbbVie, Daiichi Sankyo, Takeda. Payment or
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus,
manuscript writing or educational events dAstraZeneca,
Amgen, Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Springer, PeerVoice,
Medscape, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche,
Ecancer, TouchIME. Support for attending meetings and/or
traveldAmgen. LP-A: all support for the present manu-
scriptdAstraZeneca. Grants or contracts from any enti-
tydMerck Sharp & Dohme, AstraZeneca, P ﬁzer, Bristol
Myers Squibb. Consulting fees (personal) dLilly, Merck
Sharp Dohme, Roche, PharaMar, Merck, AstraZeneca,
Novartis, Servier, Amgen, P ﬁzer, Sanoﬁ, Bayer, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Mirati, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Takeda, Daiichi
Sankyo. Payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations,
speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational even-
tsdAstraZeneca, Janssen, Merck, Mirati. Participation on a
Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board dAltum
Sequencing, Genomic. MDL: all support for the present
manuscriptdAstraZeneca. Payment or honoraria for lec-
tures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing
or educational events dAstraZeneca, Roche, P ﬁzer, Merck
Sharp Dohme. Support for attending meetings and/or
traveldRoche, Merck Sharp Dohme. NBL: all support for
the present manuscript dAstraZeneca. Grants or contracts
from any entity dAstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb.
Consulting fees dEMD Serono. Payment or honoraria for
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript
writing or educational events dMerck Sharp & Dohme,
Bristol Myers Squibb. PJ: all support for the present man-
uscriptdAstraZeneca. Grants or contracts from any entity-
dAstellas Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo,
PUMA, Eli Lilly, Boehringer Ingelheim, Revolution Medi-
cines, Takeda. Royalties or licenses dLabcorp (post-mar-
keting royalties from DFCI owned intellectual property on
EGFR mutations. Consulting fees dAstraZeneca, Boehringer
Ingelheim, P ﬁzer, Roche/Genentech, Chugai Pharmaceuti-
cals, ACEA Biosciences, Ignyta, LOXO, Eli Lilly, Araxes, SFJ
Pharmaceuticals, Voronoi, Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, Sano
ﬁ,
Takeda, Nuvalent, Eisai, Bayer, Silicon Therapeutics, Syndax,
Allorion Therapeutics, Accutar Biotech, AbbVie, Monte
Rosa, Scorpion Therapeutics, Merus. Participation on a Data
Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board dMirati Thera-
peutics, Biocartis, Transcenta, Frontier Medicines, Hongyun
Biotechnology, Duality. Stock or stock options dGatekeeper
Pharmaceuticals. SP: all support for the present manu-
scriptdAstraZeneca (funding to institution to support study
conduct; medical writing support [no direct transfer of
funds]. Grants or contracts from any entity dprincipal
investigator in trials (institutional ﬁnancial support for
clinical trials) sponsored by Amgen, AstraZeneca, BeiGene,
Bristol Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp and
Dohme, Roche/Genentech. All fees to institution. Consul-
ting fees dAbbVie, AiCME, Amgen, Arcus, AstraZeneca,
Bayer, BeiGene, Biocartis, BioInvent, Blueprint Medicines,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Clovis, Daiichi
Sankyo, Debiopharm, ecancer, Eli Lilly, Elsevier, F-Star,
Fishawack, Foundation Medicine, Genzyme, Gilead, Glax-
oSmithKline, Illumina, Imedex, IQVIA, Incyte, Ipsen, iTeos,
Janssen, Medscape, Medtoday, Merck Sharp and Dohme,
Merck Serono, Merrimack, Novartis, Novocure, OncologyE-
ducation, PharmaMar, Phosplatin Therapeutics, PER,
J. R. Gosney et al. ESMO Open
Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 5
PeerView, P ﬁzer, PRIME, Regeneron, RMEI, Roche/Gen-
entech, RTP , Sanoﬁ, Seattle Genetics, Takeda, Vaccibody. All
fees to institution. Payment or honoraria for lectures, pre-
sentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or
educational events dAiCME, AstraZeneca, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, ecancer, Eli Lilly, Founda-
tion Medicine, Illumina, Imedex, Medscape, Merck Sharp
and Dohme, Mirati, Novartis, Peerview, PER, P ﬁzer, Prime,
Roche/Genentech, RTP , Sano ﬁ, Takeda. All fees to institu-
tion. Support for attending meetings and/or trav-
eldAstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli
Lilly, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche/
Genentech, Takeda. All fees to institution. Participation on a
Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board dAbbVie,
AiCME, Amgen, Arcus, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BeiGene, Bio-
cartis, BioInvent, Blueprint Medicines, Boehringer Ingel-
heim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Clovis, Daiichi Sankyo,
Debiopharm, ecancer, Eli Lilly, Elsevier, F-Star, Fishawack,
Foundation Medicine, Genzyme, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline,
Illumina, Imedex, IQVIA, Incyte, Ipsen, iTeos, Janssen,
Medscape, Medtoday, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Merck
Serono, Merrimack, Novartis, Novocure, OncologyEduca-
tion, PharmaMar, Phosplatin Therapeutics, PER, PeerView,
Pﬁzer, PRIME, Regeneron, RMEI, Roche/Genentech, RTP ,
Sanoﬁ, Seattle Genetics, Takeda, Vaccibody. All fees to
institution. TM: all support for the present manu-
scriptdAstraZeneca. Grants or contracts from any enti-
tydBristol Myers Squibb, G1 Therapeutics Inc., Merck
Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, P ﬁzer, Roche, SFJ
Pharmaceuticals, Takeda, XCovery. Consulting fees dperso-
nal fees: AbbVie, Inc., ACEA Pharma, Adagene, Alpha Bio-
pharma Co., Ltd., Amgen, Amoy Diagnostics Co., Ltd.,
AstraZeneca (before 2019); Aurora, Bayer Healthcare Phar-
maceuticals Ltd., BeiGene, BerGerBio ASA, Berry Oncology,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bowtie Life Insurance Company
Limited, Bridge Biotherapeutics Inc., Bristol Myers Squibb,
Blueprint Medicines Corp., C4 Therapeutics, Inc., Cirina Ltd.,
Coviden LP , CStone Pharmaceuticals, Curio Science, Da
Volterra, Daiichi Sankyo, D3 Bio Ltd., Elevation Oncology,
Eisai, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Fishawack Facilitate Ltd.,
Foundation One, G1 therapeutics Inc., geneDecode
(uncompensated), Genetech, Gilead Sciences, Inc., Grit-
stone Oncology Inc., Guardant Health, Hengrui Therapeutics
Inc, Hutchmed, Ignyta Inc., Inivata, IQVIA, Incyte Corp.,
Inivata, Janssen, Lakeshore Biotech Ltd., Lilly, Loxo
Oncology, Lucense Health Inc., Lunit USA, Inc., Medscape
LLC/WebMD, Medtronic, Merck Serono, Merck Sharp &
Dohme, Mirati Therapeutics, Inc., MiRXES, MoreHealth,
Novartis, Omega Therapeutics Inc, OrigiMed, OSE Immu-
notherapeutics, PeerVoice, P ﬁzer, Puma Biotechnology, Inc.,
Qiming Development (HK) Ltd., Roche Diagnostics, Roche
Pharmaceuticals, Sano ﬁ-Aventis, SFJ Pharmaceuticals, Sim-
cere of America Inc., Synergy Research, Takeda Pharma-
ceuticals HK Lyd., Tiermed, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Virtus
Medical Group, Yuhan Corp. Payment or honoraria for lec-
tures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing
or educational events dACEA Pharma, Alpha Biopharma
Co., Ltd., Amgen, Amoy Diagnostics Co., Ltd., AstraZeneca
(before 2019), BeiGene, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Fishawack Facilitate Ltd.,
Foundation One, InMed Medical Communication, Janssen
Pharmaceutica NV, Jiahui Holdings Co. Limited, Lilly,
Lunit USA, Inc., MD Health Brazil, Medscape LLC, Merck
Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme, MiRXES, Novartis, OrigiMed
Co. Ltd., PeerVoice, Physicians ’ Education Resource,
P . Permanyer SL, P ﬁzer, Inc., PrIME Oncology, Research to
Practice, Roche Pharmaceuticals, Roche Diagnostics, Sano ﬁ-
Aventis, Shanghai Promedican Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd.,
Takeda, Touch Medical Media, Daz Group, Lucence Health,
Inc., Merck Pharmaceuticals HK Ltd., Shanghai BeBirds
Translation & Consulting Co., Ltd., Liangyhui Network
Technology Co., Ltd., Takeda Oncology, Taiho Pharmaceu-
tical Co. Ltd, Touch Independent Medical Education Ltd.
Participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory
BoarddAbbVie, Inc., ACEA Pharma, Amgen, AstraZeneca,
BerGenBio ASA, Berry Oncology, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Bowtie Life Insurance Co Ltd, Bristol Myers Squibb, Blue-
print Medicines Corp., Covidien LP , CStone Pharmaceuticals,
D3 Bio Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Inc., Eisai, Fishawack Facilitate
Ltd., geneDecode (uncompensated), Gritstone Oncology
Inc., Guardant Health, Hengrui Therapeutics, Ignyta Inc,
IQVIA, Incyte Corp., Janssen, Lakeshore Biotech, Lilly, Loxo
Oncology, Lunit USA, Inc., Merck Serono, Merck Sharp &
Dohme, Mirati Therapeutics Inc., MiRXES Group, Novartis,
OrigiMed, P ﬁzer, Puma Biotechnology Inc., Roche, Sano ﬁ-
Aventis R&D, Simcere of America Inc., Takeda, Virtus Med-
ical Group, Yuhan Corp., HutchMed, SFJ Pharmaceuticals,
Curio Science, Inivata, Berry Oncology, G1 Therapeutics,
Gilead Sciences, Inc., Vertex Pharmaceuticals, C4 Thera-
peutics, Inc. Leadership or ﬁduciary role in other board,
society committee or advocacy group, paid or
unpaiddAmerican Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO),
2018-2022, Board of Directors/Leadership (non-remuner-
ated); Asian Thoracic Oncology Research Group (ATORG),
2016-present, Board of Directors/Leadership (non-remu-
nerated); Chinese Lung Cancer Research Foundation Limited
(CLCRF), 2005-2012, Board of Directors/Leadership (non-
remunerated); Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO),
2009-2020, Board of Directors/Leadership (non-remuner-
ated); Hong Kong Cancer Fund (HKCF), 2011-present, Board
of Directors/Leadership (non-remunerated); Hong Kong
Cancer Therapy Society (HKCTS), 2004-present, Board of
Directors/Leadership (non-remunerated); International As-
sociation for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC), 2007-2019,
Board of Directors/Leadership (non-remunerated); St.
Stephen’s College & Prep. School, 2017-present, Board of
Directors/Leadership (non-remunerated); Hong Kong Acad-
emy of Sciences (ASHK), 2022-present, Board of Directors/
Leadership (non-remunerated). Stock or stock
optionsdLunit USA, Inc., stock options; HutchMed, share-
holder; Prenetics, shareholder; Aurora Tele-Oncology Ltd.,
shareholder; Bowtie Life Insurance Co. Ltd, stock options;
Lakeshore Biotech Ltd, stock options; D3 Bio, stock options;
Biolidics Ltd., shareholder; AstraZeneca, shareholder. UM:
all support for the present manuscript eAstraZeneca.
consulting fees dBoehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp
ESMO Open J. R. Gosney et al.
6 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023
Dohme, Roche, Amgen, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, Eli Lilly,
Diaceutics, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, AstraZeneca, Janssen,
Diatech, Novartis, Hedera. Payment or honoraria for
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript
writing or educational events dBoehringer Ingelheim,
Merck Sharp Dohme, Roche, Amgen, Thermo Fisher Scien-
tiﬁc, Eli Lilly, Diaceutics, Janssen, Novartis, AstraZeneca.
Leadership or ﬁduciary role in other board, society, com-
mittee or advocacy group, paid or unpaid dScientiﬁc Sec-
retary of International Society of Liquid Biopsy. Receipt of
equipment, materials, drugs, medical writing, gifts or other
servicesdThermo Fisher, Qiagen.
DATA SHARING
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets
were generated or analysed during the current study.
REFERENCES
1. Hendriks L, Kerr K, Menis J, et al. Oncogene-addicted metastatic non-
small-cell lung cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis,
treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol . 2023;34:339-357 .
2. Passaro A, Leighl N, Blackhall F, et al. ESMO expert consensus state-
ments on the management of EGFR mutant non-small-cell lung cancer .
Ann Oncol . 2022;33:466-487 .
3. Hanna NH, Schneider BJ, Temin S, et al. Therapy for stage IV non e
small-cell lung cancer without driver alterations: ASCO and OH (CCO)
joint guideline update. J Clin Oncol . 2020;38:1608-1632 .
4. Aisner DL, Akerley W , Bauman JR, et al. NCCN guidelines version 5.
2022 non-small cell lung cancer continue NCCN guidelines panel dis-
closures. 2022. Available at National Comprehensive Cancer Network.
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (Version 3.2023). https://www.nccn.org/
professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nscl.pdf. Accessed June 13, 2023.
5. Thunnissen E, Weynand B, Udovicic-Gagula D, et al. Lung cancer
biomarker testing: perspective from Europe. Transl Lung Cancer Res .
2020;9:887-897.
6. Anand K, Phung TL, Bernicker EH, Cagle PT , Olsen RJ, Thomas JS.
Clinical utility of re ﬂex ordered testing for molecular biomarkers in
lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Lung Cancer . 2020;21:437-442 .
7. Kerr KM, Bibeau F, Thunnissen E, et al. The evolving landscape of
biomarker testing for non-small cell lung cancer in Europe. Lung
Cancer. 2021;154:161-175 .
8. Winkelman DF, Varkhedkar VM, Stellander-Amato H, Bailey L,
Kachadourian A. Why are oncologists not testing all NSCLC patients
for biomarkers in the U.S. market? J Clin Oncol . 2021;39(suppl 15):
e21003.
9. Pennell NA, Arcila ME, Gandara DR, West H. Biomarker testing for
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: real-world issues
and tough choices. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book . 2019;39:531-542 .
10. Gierman HJ, Goldfarb S, Labrador M, et al. Genomic testing and
treatment landscape in patients with advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (aNSCLC) using real-world data from community oncology
practices. J Clin Oncol . 2019;37(suppl 15):1585 .
11. B r a x t o nD R ,H u a n gY ,D a r a b iS ,C h a v e zF ,D a sP M ,B o w e nT .P a t h o l o g y
molecular re ﬂex testing improves turn-around-time and overall mo-
lecular testing rates in NSCLC. JC l i nO n c o l. 2021;39(suppl 15):
e13507.
12. Mino-Kenudson M, Mark EJ. Re ﬂex testing for epidermal growth factor
receptor mutation and anaplastic lymphoma kinase ﬂuorescence in
situ hybridization in non-small cell lung cancer . Arch Pathol Lab Med .
2011;135:655-664.
13. D’Angelo SP , Park B, Azzoli CG, et al. Re ﬂex testing of resected stage i
through III lung adenocarcinomas for
EGFR and KRAS mutation: report
on initial experience and clinical utility at a single center. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2011;141:476-480 .
14. Aggarwal C, Bubendorf L, Cooper WA, et al. Molecular testing in stage
I-III non-small cell lung cancer: approaches and challenges. Lung
Cancer. 2021;162:42-53 .
15. Levy BP , Chioda MD, Herndon D, et al. Molecular testing for treatment
of metastatic non-small cell lung cancer: how to implement evidence-
based recommendations. Oncologist. 2015;20:1175-1181 .
16. Bruno DS, Hess LM, Li X, Su EW , Zhu YE, Patel M. Racial disparities in
biomarker testing and clinical trial enrollment in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). J Clin Oncol . 2021;39(suppl 15):9005 .
17. Cheema PK, Menjak IB, Winterton-Perks Z, et al. Impact of re ﬂex EGFR/
ALK testing on time to treatment of patients with advanced non-
squamous non-small-cell lung cancer. J Oncol Pract . 2017;13:e130-
e138.
18. Lim C, Tsao MS, Le LW , et al. Biomarker testing and time to treatment
decision in patients with advanced nonsmall-cell lung cancer . Ann
Oncol. 2015;26:1415-1421 .
19. Cheema PK, Raphael S, El-Maraghi R, et al. Rate ofEGFR mutation testing
for patients with nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer with
implementation of re ﬂex testing by pathologists. Curr Oncol. 2017;24:
16-22.
20. Marmarelis M, Berman A, Scholes D, et al. P59.21 Impact of re ﬂex
testing on pathology based molecular testing in patients with
advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). J Thorac
Oncol. 2021;16:S1157 .
21. Inal C, Yilmaz E, Cheng H, et al. Effect of re ﬂex testing by pathologists on
molecular testing rates in lung cancer patients: experience from a
community-based academic center .J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(suppl 15):8098.
22. Takahashi T, Nishio M, Nishino K, et al. Real-world study of next-
generation sequencing diagnostic biomarker testing for patients with
lung cancer in Japan. Cancer Sci . 2023;114:2524-2533 .
23. Stewart DJ, Maziak D, Gomes M, et al. Abstract 5489: The cost of
delaying therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a
population kinetics assessment. Cancer Res . 2020;80(suppl 16):5489 .
24. Shefﬁeld B, Eaton K, Emond B, et al. MA12.05 Economic impact of
delaying care with single-gene testing versus next-generation
sequencing in non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol . 2022;17:
S86-S87.
25. Herbst RS, Wu Y-L, John T, et al. Adjuvant osimertinib for resected
EGFR-mutated stage IB-IIIA non-small-cell lung cancer: updated results
from the phase III randomized ADAURA trial. J Clin Oncol . 2023;41:
1830-1840.
26. Penault-Llorca F, Kerr KM, Garrido P , et al. Expert opinion on NSCLC
small specimen biomarker testing - Part 1: tissue collection and
management. Virchows Arch . 2022;481:335-350 .
27. Robert NJ, Nwokeji ED, Espirito JL, et al. Biomarker tissue journey
among patients (pts) with untreated metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer (mNSCLC) in the U.S. Oncology Network community practices.
J Clin Oncol . 2021;39(suppl 15):9004 .
28. Pruneri G, de Braud F, Sapino A, et al. Next-generation sequencing in
clinical practice: is it a cost-saving alternative to a single-gene testing
approach? Pharmacoecon Open . 2021;5:285-298 .
29. Pennell NA, Mutebi A, Zhou Z-Y , et al. Economic impact of next-
generation sequencing versus single-gene testing to detect genomic
alterations in metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer using a decision
analytic model. JCO Precis Oncol . 2019;3:1-9 .
30. Travis WD, Brambilla E, Nicholson AG, et al. The 2015 World Health
Organization classi ﬁcation of lung tumors: impact of genetic, clinical
and radiologic advances since the 2004 classi ﬁcation. J Thorac Oncol .
2015;10:1243-1260.
31. Planchard D, Popat S, Kerr K, et al. Metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and
follow-up. Ann Oncol . 2018;29(suppl 4):iv192-iv237 .
32. Singh N, Temin S, Baker S Jr, et al. Therapy for stage IV non-small-cell
lung cancer with driver alterations: ASCO living guideline. J Clin Oncol .
2022;40:3310-3322.
J. R. Gosney et al. ESMO Open
Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 7
33. Cheung AHK, Tong JHM, Chung LY , et al. EGFR mutation exists in
squamous cell lung carcinoma. Pathology. 2020;52:323-328 .
34. Lu S, Lu C, Xiao Y , et al. Comparison of EML4-ALK fusion gene positive
rate in different detection methods and samples of non-small cell lung
cancer .J Cancer. 2020;11:1525-1531 .
35. Ho HL, Kao HL, Yeh YC, Chou TY . The importance of EGFR mutation
testing in squamous cell carcinoma or non-small cell carcinoma favor
squamous cell carcinoma diagnosed from small lung biopsies. Diagn
Pathol. 2019;14:59 .
36. Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, et al. Diagnosis of lung cancer in small
biopsies and cytology: implications of the 2011 International Association
for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/European Res-
piratory Society classiﬁcation. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013;137:668-684.
37. Loo PS, Thomas SC, Nicolson MC, Fyfe MN, Kerr KM. Subtyping of
undifferentiated non-small cell carcinomas in bronchial biopsy speci-
mens. J Thorac Oncol . 2010;5:442-447 .
38. Lindeman NI, Cagle PT, Aisner DL, et al. Updated molecular testing
guideline for the selection of lung cancer patients for treatment with
targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors: guideline from the College of
American Pathologists, the International Association for the Study of
Lung Cancer, and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Arch Pathol
Lab Med . 2018;142:321-346 .
ESMO Open J. R. Gosney et al.
8 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101587 Volume 8 - Issue 4 - 2023