Original Article
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
and Neurology
2024, Vol. 37(2) 157 – 162
© The Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/08919887231195337
journals.sagepub.com/home/jgp
Atypical Neuropsychiatric Presentation of
FTD-ALS Caused by a Pathogenic Repeat
Expansion in C9orf72: A Case Report
Marissa A. LeBlanc, MD, PhD 1,2,*, Amy Gough, MD 1,2,*,
Andrea L. Rideout, MS, CGC, CCGC 3, Sarah Dyack, MD 2,3,
Kathleen Singh, MD 1,2,**, and Meagan MacNeil, MD 1,2,**
Abstract
The case report describes the presentation of a 42-year-old male ultimately diagnosed with FTD-ALS caused by a genetic
mutation, who initially presented with atypical psychiatric symptoms. Given that the initial clinical manifestations of FTD-
ALS can be quite variable, the diagnosis is often challenging; the case report aims to highlight several key considerations in
the diagnostic assessment, including genetic testing in order to guide clinicians in more timely diagnosis and ultimately
improve patient care.
Keywords
c9orf72, frontotemporal dementia, psychosis
Introduction
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) are fatal neurodegenerative diseases that
cause progressive morbidity for patients and personal
burden for their families. As with other neurodegenerative
diseases, the underlying etiology remains poorly under-
stood, and there is no disease-modifying treatment.
However, within the last decade, the hexanucleotide
GGGGCC repeat expansion in the C9orf72 gene was
identiﬁed as the most frequent cause of both ALS and FTD
in Europe and North America,
1,2 with up to 10% of cases
identiﬁed in the combined presentation of FTD-ALS. 3,4
C9orf72 related FTD-ALS is an autosomal dominant
disorder, with a 50% recurrence risk in ﬁrst degree rela-
tives. Although the speciﬁc molecular mechanisms leading
to neurodegeneration in patients with pathogenic expan-
sions in C9 orf72 have not been fully elucidated, there is
evidence that these lead to alteration of various metabolic
pathways in affected cells.
5 The discovery of C9orf72 gene
expansion’s probable role in the underpinning of neuro-
degenerative disorders has contributed to the under-
standing of the inheritance of these disorders.
The clinical manifestations of neurodegenerative ill-
nesses due to C9orf72 repeat expansions are quite het-
erogenic with overlapping features.
6 The most common
clinical presentations are behavioural variants of FTD
(bvFTD), ALS, or a combination of both (FTD-ALS). 7
Neuropsychiatric symptoms due to C9orf72 mutations
most often include apathy, disinhibition, loss of empathy,
stereotyped/repetitive behaviour, and hyperorality.
8
However, late-onset psychotic disorders have been iden-
tiﬁed in some cases as the initial presentation of both FTD
and ALS symptoms,
9,10 with an increase prevalence of
psychosis in individuals with C9orf72 mutations.11 Other
reports include a constellation of psychiatric presentations,
including mania and bipolar disorder, major depressive
episodes with and without catatonic features, and
obsessive-compulsive disorder.
1Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
2Nova Scotia Health, Halifax, NS, Canada
3IWK Maritime Medical Genetics, Halifax, NS, Canada
*the two authors have contributed equally to this manuscript
**the two authors have contributed equally to this manuscript
Corresponding Author:
Marissa A. LeBlanc, Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University,
Abbie J. Lane, Building 5909 Veteran’s Memorial Lane, Halifax, NS B3H
2E2, Canada.
Email: m.leblanc@dal.ca
The wide variability in presentations associated with
C9orf72 pathogenic variants can make clinical diagnosis
challenging. Improving the awareness of clinical presen-
tations and when to consider genetic testing will help
provide more timely diagnosis and ultimately improve
patient care. In addition, attention to gene content is re-
quired when arranging genetic testing for FTD-ALS as
testing for C9orf72 expansions may need to be speci ﬁcally
requested in certain institutions. We present a case of FTD-
ALS due to a pathogenic GGGGCC repeat expansion in
C9orf72 that ﬁrst came to clinical attention with atypical
psychiatric symptoms.
Case Report
A 42-year-old previously healthy male with a remote
history of mild depression presented to the local emer-
gency department (ED) accompanied by concerned col-
leagues due to reports of personality changes and bizarre
behaviour over the past several months. The initial unusual
behaviours included being more intrusive, verbally ag-
gressive, ﬁxated on his mother ’s health, and somewhat
disinhibited with emotional lability (eg showing pictures of
his deceased father to strangers and expressing excessive
grief despite him dying more than 10 years prior). Due to
these concerns, he had recently been compassionately
released from his professional line of work. In his personal
life, he was noted to be more erratic – eg dropping his
children off and not returning to pick them up.
Upon initial assessment in the ED, there were no acute
medical concerns identiﬁed, and psychiatry was consulted
for assessment. Additional history obtained included a 1-
year history of gradually progressive behavioural changes–
eg, aversion to meat/proteins, with simple carbohydrate
cravings; increased alcohol consumption; confrontations
with the police; disinhibition (eg urinating in the kitchen sink
at home); and short-term memory impairment. Mood in-
quiry revealed social withdrawal, irritability, and hyper-
somnia, but no other depressive symptoms (eg sadness,
guilt, worthlessness). Psychotic symptoms included a
seemingly delusional belief that his mother required a
specialized ketogenic diet. The patient was noted to be
emotional, amotivated, withdrawn, angry and defensive on
assessment. Aside from alcohol use, there were no other
substances reported. The preliminary diagnostic impression
was an unspeci ﬁed psychotic disorder vs a mood disorder
with a psychotic component, and he was admitted to acute
care psychiatry for further assessment and management.
In hospital, psychotic symptoms were unresponsive to
trials of methrotrimeprazine, ﬂupenthixol, loxapine, and
paliperidone with notable intolerances including excessive
drooling. There was no response to benzodiazepines nor 5
electroconvulsive treatments. Over the course of approx-
imately two months in hospital, there was signi ﬁcant
functional decline including purposeless repetitive be-
haviours, hyperphagia of simple carbohydrates, poor hy-
giene management, worsening confusion and cognition
(Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score 5/30), and
signs of regression (eg, walking around the unit holding a
teddy bear). He commented on experiencing visual hal-
lucinations of his daughter; no other perceptual distur-
bances were noted. At approximately 3 months from the
time of admission, he had become dependent for several
activities of daily living including bathing, grooming and
continence. His speech dif ﬁculties progressed to eventual
mutism, and oral intake declined as dysphagia progressed.
He walked purposelessly around the unit (up to 30 km/
day). Neurological examination was unremarkable aside
from mild coordination deﬁcits (slightly slowed ﬁne ﬁnger
movements and toe tap bilaterally), and there was no
ﬂuctuation in symptoms to suggest delirium.
Concurrent with the progres sive decline, an extensive
work-up was conducted to establish diagnosis. It became
clear early-on that the prelim inary diagnosis of unspeciﬁed
psychosis was unlikely given features such as late age of
onset, lack of family history for a primary psychotic disorder,
treatment non-response with several antipsychotic trials, as
well as atypical features – most notably, the progressive
cognitive and functional decline. In the context of increased
disinhibition and regression, a rapidly progressive neurode-
generative disorder of unknown etiology was suspected.
In consultation with internal medicine, neurology, and
geriatric psychiatry, multiple investigations were performed
to assess for reversible causes of rapidly progressive de-
mentia. Preliminary neuroimaging included a normal CT
head and normal MRI brain aside from moderately dilated
ventricles but no speci ﬁc pattern of atrophy; there was no
evidence of intracranial lesion, mass, infarction or hemor-
rhage. Routine blood work (CBC, electrolytes, extended
electrolytes, renal and liver function) was unremarkable,
with further tests demonstrating no evidence of systemic
autoimmune or inﬂammatory (ANA, CRP , ESR), infectious
( H I V ,H B V ,H C V ,l y m e ,s y p h i l i s– RPR and VDRL,
Whipple’s disease), vasculitis (negative vasculitis panel),
toxic or heavy metal (lead, copper, iron and ceruloplasmin),
endocrine (TSH, anti-TPO) or metabolic (plasma amino acid
and urine amino and organic acid analysis) disease. Multiple
causes of encephalitis were ruled out given no evidence of
infection at any time, normal CT and MRI brain and neg-
ative CSF results for infectious, inﬂammatory, autoimmune
(anti-NMDA), paraneoplastic (paraneoplastic antibodies) or
neurodegenerative (CSF Tau protein, 14-3-3- protein, end-
point quaking-induced conversion time was negative)
causes. There were no features suggestive of an alcohol-
related cause (eg Wernicke ’s or hepatic encephalopathy),
and liver enzymes, liver function tests (INR, PTT, albumin),
and ammonia levels were within normal range. Neoplastic or
paraneoplastic causes were unsupported by normal serum
158 Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology 37(2)
markers, SPEP , and CT chest/abdomen/pelvis showing no
evidence of malignancy (there was note of very mild
splenomegaly). Pertinent family history (medical or psy-
chiatric) was bulbar ALS in the patient ’s father who was
diagnosed at the age of 54, and whose disease progressed to
death within 18 months. This raised the possibility of a FTD-
ALS genetic disorder in our patient.
A brain SPECT scan was ordered and demonstrated
moderate decreased perfusion to the parietal lobes bilat-
erally, left greater than right, with some involvement of the
posterior aspect of the left frontal lobe. The nuclear
medicine radiologist concluded the distribution was most
in keeping with Alzheimer ’s disease and it was not felt to
represent frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
However, given ongoing clinical suspicion for a rapidly
progressive neurodegenerative cause, genetic testing was
performed and identi ﬁed a repeat expansion of GGGGCC
in C9orf72, thereby con ﬁrming a diagnosis of FTD-ALS.
The patient’s substitute decision maker was informed and
goals of care were established given the progressive and
ultimately fatal outcome of this disease. The genetics team
played a central role in providing psychoeducation,
counseling and support to the family.
The patient was transferred to a geriatric psychiatry
inpatient unit for end-of-life care. Agitation and distress
were treated symptomatically with 1:1 care, olanzapine
and lorazepam as needed, and a modi ﬁed diet for pro-
gressive dysphagia. Ultimately, he died from complica-
tions of aspiration pneumonia. His family consented to
post-mortem autopsy and the ﬁnal report con ﬁrmed a
fronto-temporal lobar degeneration with transactive re-
sponse DNA binding protein (TDP) pathology, interna-
tional harmonized classi ﬁcation type C.
Discussion
This is a case summary of a 42-year-old male with a rapidly
progressive FTD-ALS caused by a pathogenic repeat
expansion of GGGGCC in the C9orf72 gene, which
presented with psychosis and disorganized behavior
leading to admission to psychiatry. This was on the
background of typical symptoms of bvFTD such as dis-
inhibition, apathy, carbohydrate craving and personality
changes. Cognition and function rapidly declined over the
course of several months. He died approximately two years
after symptom onset. There were several salient features of
this case that present learning opportunities to support
more timely diagnosis of this relatively rare diagnosis.
Diagnosis
V arious elements of FTD-ALS presentations can lead to
delay in diagnosis, including the overlapping yet hetero-
genetic neuropsychiatric clinical manifestations. Psychotic
symptoms and other neuropsychiatric symptoms (eg ap-
athy, disinhibition) are common presenting symptoms
12
often misdiagnosed as a primary psychiatric disorder. In
this case, although there were typical symptoms of bvFTD,
the age of onset and presence of psychosis led to an initial
diagnosis of an unspeci ﬁed psychotic disorder. Psychotic
symptoms, including delusions and/or hallucinations, are
relatively more common in C9orf72 positive cases of FTD-
ALS than in C9orf72 negative cases. Delusions (but not
hallucinations) are also more common in FTD-ALS than in
bvFTD without ALS
13 As such, it was interesting that in
this case ( c9orf72 positive FTD-ALS) the patient had
visual hallucinations, as these are relatively rare in FTLD14
and in cases of psychosis amongst C9orf72 carriers.15
In addition, other reports have described various psy-
chiatric presentations of FTD-ALS, including mania,
major depressive episodes with/without catatonic features,
and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Of note, although
bvFTD is commonly misdiagnosed as depression upon
initial presentation, the symptoms leading to this diagnosis
are often not speci ﬁc to mood (eg guilt, worthlessness,
crying), but more commonly apathy, reduced empathy, and
social withdrawal.
16 Careful clinical assessment can help
to distinguish these features.
Patients with FTD-ALS C9orf72 also have a higher rate
of family psychiatric history17 which can lead to clinical bias
and misdiagnosis.16 Furthermore, C9orf72 gene expansions
have also been identi ﬁed as rare causes of other neurode-
generative phenotypes,18 including in 1% of Parkinson ’s
disease and Alzheimer ’s disease, 3,4 progressive supra-
nuclear palsy, ataxic syndromes, corticobasal syndrome,
Huntington disease-like syndrome, and Creutzfeldt-Jacob
disease. Initial steps towards improving clinical care include
awareness of the various potential clinical presentations.
11
Ultimately, an atypical psychiatric presentation should
lead to further investigations and consideration of in-
volvement of other services. For example, some reports
describe poor response and adverse reactions to antipsy-
chotic medications
19,20 which should trigger further in-
vestigations. Furthermore, family history is extremely
important, and should include inquiries into early-onset
dementia, FTD, ALS, Parkinsonism, and unexplained
neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Clinical symptoms of demen tia should be investigated
with standardized testing and collateral. All atypical pre-
sentations should receive a minimum of a CT scan at baseline,
and ideally an MRI to detect early signs of cortical and
subcortical atrophy.
6 The typical pattern of cognitive im-
pairment seen in FTD-ALS includes de ﬁcits of social cog-
nition and executive dysfunction and may include memory
disturbances and parietal lobe de ﬁcits.
7,9 Useful diagnostic
criteria to aid in diagnosis include the revised Strong Criteria
for diagnosis of frontotemporal dysfunction in ALS
21 as well
as the Neary22 or Hodges23 criteria for FTD-ALS.
LeBlanc et al. 159
Genetic Testing
Technological advances in sequencing are allowing for
genetic testing to play a useful role in the con ﬁrmation of
inherited neurodegenerative disorders. Finding a genetic
cause can be helpful as it can remove diagnostic uncer-
tainty and inform affected families of their risk. It is also
becoming increasingly useful to help qualify for precision
treatment and to allow for opportunities to enrol into
clinical trials.
24
However, as C9orf72 mutations are repeat expansions,
they cannot always be accurately detected by the testing
method employed for panels and whole exome sequenc-
ing. When investigating patients and choosing genetic
testing for FTD-ALS, it is imperative to ensure that
C9orf72 is being sequenced; it is not currently included in
all targeted genetic testing panels for early onset dementia
and may need to be speci ﬁcally ordered with a sample sent
to an alternate laboratory for Sanger Sequencing.
24 Whole
genome sequencing in contrast has been shown to detect
most repeat expansions for these conditions,
25,26 but is not
yet widely clinically available. This may evolve to be the
test of choice in the future.
Ethical Considerations
Despite the absence of disease modifying therapy, timely
diagnosis of FTD-ALS has important implications for
genetic family counselling and prognosis. Early diagnosis
can also help to avoid further treatment trials and inves-
tigations, which carry various risks. As these illnesses can
affect adults in the younger age (with age of onset iden-
tiﬁed from 27-83, and the disease duration is from 1-
22 years), it can cause signi ﬁcant burden on patients and
their families. Once a C9orf72 pathogenic repeat has been
identiﬁed as the cause of the FTD-ALS in the patient,
genetic counselling is available to educate the family about
the early signs and symptoms of the condition, phenotypic
spectrum, inheritance pattern and the chance to inherit the
condition. Family members may have the option of pre-
dictive genetic testing to determine if they have inherited
the condition. Some individuals may use this information
to make life and family planning decisions. For some, the
option of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis may be
available to avoid passing on the condition to future
generations. Overall, diagnosis can help patients and
families prepare for the devastating road ahead.
It is important to consider the ethical issues of genetic
testing for adult-onset disorders and to obtain informed
consent before ordering these tests. The process of consent
differs, dependent upon whether the testing is being per-
formed on a symptomatic patient to conﬁrm a diagnosis or is
predictive testing in an at-risk individual. When ordering
testing on affected patients, they often have limited capacity
to participate in informed decision making, and consent for
genetic testing is often provided through the substitute de-
cision maker. As these conditi ons are adult-onset and in-
herited in an autosomal dominant fashion, achieving a genetic
diagnosis for early onset neurodegenerative conditions often
has direct implications for family members.
Genetic testing in pre-symptomatic family members
should only be undertaken after an extensive multi-session
genetic counselling approach adapted from the protocol
utilized in Huntington ’s disease has been completed.
27,28
The implications these conditions have for pre-
symptomatic individuals including education, employ-
ment, insurance, and family planning, are daunting.
Concern of how to communicate information about these
conditions to other family members and especially their
children, feeling frantic, or feeling of worry about
symptom development, are all common reactions. For
C9orf72 patients in particular, the double threat of either
developing dementia or ALS is particularly dif ﬁcult and
having the opportunity to explore their situation with
genetic counsellors can be therapeutic.
29
Future Directions
Finally, an improvement into our understanding of these
clinical manifestations and even possible “prodromes” in
leading up to diagnosis will improve overall clinical care.
The identi ﬁcation of a genetic cause of FTD-ALS has
helped in understanding these illnesses
1,2 and launched a
signiﬁcant amount of research on these topics. 6,30 Indeed,
there has been recent progress in developing targeted
therapies for C9orf72 related FTD-ALS. However, the
development of these has been challenging, in that there
may be both a toxic gain of function effect from the ac-
cumulation of expanded RNA foci and the accumulation of
abnormal dipeptide repeat proteins (DPRs), as well as loss
of function effect from a reduction in translation of
C9orf72.
31 Despite the challenges, antisense oligonucle-
otide therapeutics to bind and remove toxic RNA are being
clinically developed. 32,33 Small molecule approaches,
such as repurposing Metformin to reduce toxic C9orf72
translation products, and new molecules such as TPN101
to reduce CNS in ﬂammation are also in development.
34 In
addition, molecules have been studied to reduce the
neurotoxic effects of DPRs by blocking their export from
the nucleus.
35 Loss of function effects have been less
frequently studied, but new knockdown mouse models are
now allowing researchers to further assess these effects. 36
In this model, C9orf72 loss of function has been shown to
be associated with the development of FTD-like symp-
toms,
36 paving the way for deeper understanding of the
effect of C9orf72 expansions in FTD-ALS and ultimately
help develop new therapeutic approaches. Most impor-
tantly, research is giving hope to families affected by this
160 Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology 37(2)
rare neurological condition, offering the potential of better
treatments in the future and perhaps even a cure for this
devastating condition.
Conclusion
This paper described an interesting case of a 42-year-old
male with psychiatric symptoms who was ultimately
discovered to be a carrier of a C9orf72 repeat expansion
and diagnosed with FTD-ALS. C9orf72 carriers may
initially present with neuropsychiatric symptoms that
appear to be a psychiatric disorder but are actually psy-
chiatric symptoms in the context of a neurodegenerative
disorder. Although this is often dif ﬁcult to distinguish on
initial presentation (eg whether mood related symptoms
are in keeping with a mood or psychotic disorder vs an
evolving neurodegenerative disorder), clinicians should
consider neurodegenerative disorders in their differential
diagnosis and diagnostic workup, especially when drug
treatments for psychiatric disorders are failing, as occurred
in this case. In addition, while FTD-ALS is rare, it is likely
under diagnosed given the overlap between psychiatric and
dementia/neurodegenerative phenotypes. This presenta-
tion highlights the need for genetic testing as part of this
diagnostic workup, especially in younger, treatment re-
sistant individuals and in the context of a positive family
history of early onset degenerative neurological disorders.
Finally, this case report als o highlights several key
learning points related to making the diagnosis of FTD-ALS.
Firstly, the importance of keeping a broad differential for
presentations of atypical psychosis– in this case, with late age
of onset, absence of family history, marked treatment re-
sistance (to both antipsychotics and ECT), and signi ﬁcant
functional decline beyond what would be expected in a
primary psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia. Secondly,
the important role of medical g enetics and testing in psy-
chiatric diagnoses, particularly in the context of the relevant
family history. Thirdly, returning to the initial history in the
context of diagnostic uncertainty, especially in the face of
unexpected or non-con ﬁrmatory test results; in this case,
although the neuroimagingﬁndings were not consistent with
FTD, the history led to further pursuance of genetic testing
which ultimately conﬁrmed the diagnosis. A diagnosis can
prevent additional investigations, give the patient/family an
explanation of why this disease has occurred, and offer an
opportunity for patients and their families to receive sup-
portive care through medical genetic counselling services.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr Sameh Hassan, geriatric psychiatrist, for
his input on the care of this patient and the manuscript. We would
also like to thank the patient and his family for their contribution
and willingness to participate in the advancement of medical care.
Declaration of Con ﬂicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Informed Consent
Patient’s informed consent has been obtained through substitute
decision maker, and patient information has been de-identi ﬁed
throughout the case report.
ORCID iD
Marissa A. LeBlanc  https://orcid.org/0009-0002-6410-9577
References
1. Renton AE, Majounie E, Waite A, et al. A hexanucleotide
repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome
9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron. 2011;72(2):257-268.
2. DeJesus-Hernandez M, Mackenzie IR, Boeve BF, et al.
Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding
region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and
ALS. Neuron. 2011;72(2):245-256.
3. Chi `o A, Borghero G, Restagno G, et al. Clinical characteristics
of patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis carrying
the pathogenic GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion of
C9ORF72. Brain. 2012;135(Pt 3):784-793.
4. Cruts M, Gijselinck I, V an Langenhove T, van der Zee J, V an
Broeckhoven C. Current insights into the C9orf72 repeat
expansion diseases of the FTLD/ALS spectrum. Trends
Neurosci. 2013;36(8):450-459.
5. Lualdi M, Sha ﬁque A, Pedrini E, et al. C9ORF72 repeat
expansion affects the proteome of primary skin ﬁbroblasts in
ALS. Int J Mol Sci . 2021;22(19):10385.
6. Ducharme S, Bajestan S, Dickerson BC, V oon V . Psychiatric
presentations of C9orf72 mutation: what are the diagnostic
implications for clinicians? J Neuroparasitol . 2017;29(3):
195-205.
7. Rohrer JD, Isaacs AM, Mizielinska S, et al. C9orf72 ex-
pansions in frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis. Lancet Neurol . 2015;14(3):291-301.
8. Rascovsky K, Hodges JR, Knopman D, et al. Sensitivity of
revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of
frontotemporal dementia. Brain. 2011;134(Pt 9):2456-2477.
9. Snowden JS, Rollinson S, Thompson JC, et al. Distinct
clinical and pathological characteristics of frontotemporal
dementia associated with C9ORF72 mutations. Brain. 2012;
135(Pt 3):693-708.
10. Dobson-Stone C, Hallupp M, Bartley L, et al. C9ORF72
repeat expansion in clinical and neuropathologic fronto-
temporal dementia cohorts. Neurology. 2012;79(10):
995-1001.
LeBlanc et al. 161
11. Ducharme S, Price BH, Larvie M, Dougherty DD,
Dickerson BC. Clinical approach to the differential diag-
nosis between behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia
and primary psychiatric disorders. Am J Psychiatry . 2015;
172(9):827-837.
12. Snowden JS, Harris J, Richardson A, et al. Frontotemporal
dementia with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A clinical
comparison of patients with and without repeat expansions
in C9orf72. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal De-
gener. 2013;14(3):172-176.
13. Long Z, Irish M, Foxe D, Hodges JR, Piguet O, Burrell JR.
Heterogeneity of behavioural and language de ﬁcits in FTD-
MND. J Neurol . 2021;268(8):2876-2889.
14. Naasan G, Shdo SM, Rodriguez EM, et al. Psychosis in
neurodegenerative disease: Differential patterns of halluci-
nation and delusion symptoms.Brain. 2021;144(3):999-1012.
15. Devenney EM, Landin-Romero R, Irish M, et al. The neural
correlates and clinical characteristics of psychosis in the
frontotemporal dementia continuum and the C9orf72 ex-
pansion. Neuroimage Clin . 2016;13:439-445.
16. Woolley JD, Khan BK, Murthy NK, Miller BL, Rankin KP .
The diagnostic challenge of psychiatric symptoms in neu-
rodegenerative disease: rates of and risk factors for prior
psychiatric diagnosis in patients with early neurodegener-
ative disease. J Clin Psychiatry . 2011;72(2):126-133.
17. Devenney E, Hornberger M, Irish M, et al. Frontotemporal
dementia associated with the C9ORF72 mutation: A unique
clinical pro ﬁle. JAMA Neurol . 2014;71(3):331-339.
18. Woollacott IOC, Mead S. The C9ORF72 expansion muta-
tion: Gene structure, phenotypic and diagnostic issues. Acta
Neuropathol. 2014;127(3):319-332.
19. Landqvist Wald ¨o M, Gustafson L, Nilsson K, et al. Fron-
totemporal dementia with a C9ORF72 expansion in a
Swedish family: Clinical and neuropathological character-
istics. Am J Neurodegener Dis . 2013;2(4):276-286.
20. Proudfoot M, Gutowski NJ, Edbauer D, et al. Early di-
peptide repeat pathology in a frontotemporal dementia
kindred with C9ORF72 mutation and intellectual disability.
Acta Neuropathol . 2014;127(3):451-458.
21. Strong MJ, Abrahams S, Goldstein LH, et al. Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis - frontotemporal spectrum disorder (ALS-
FTSD): revised diagnostic criteria. Amyotroph Lateral Scler
Frontotemporal Degener. 2017;18(3-4):153-174.
22. Neary D, Snowden JS, Gustafson L, et al. Frontotemporal
lobar degeneration: A consensus on clinical diagnostic
criteria. Neurology. 1998;51(6):1546-1554.
23. Hodges JR, Miller B. The classi ﬁcation, genetics and
neuropathology of frontotemporal dementia. Introduction to
the special topic papers: Part I. Neurocase. 2001;7(1):31-35.
24. Huq AJ, Sexton A, Lacaze P , et al. Genetic testing in
dementia-A medical genetics perspective. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2021;36(8):1158-1170.
25. Huq AJ, Thompson B, Bennett MF, et al. Clinical impact of
whole-genome sequencing in patients with early-onset
dementia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2022;2021:
328146.
26. Ibañez K, Polke J, Hagelstrom RT, et al. Whole genome
sequencing for the diagnosis of neurological repeat ex-
pansion disorders in the UK: A retrospective diagnostic
accuracy and prospective clinical validation study. Lancet
Neurol. 2022;21(3):234-245.
27. Roberts JS, Patterson AK, Uh lmann WR. Genetic testing
for neurodegenerative diseases: Ethical and health
communication challenges. Neurobiol Dis . 2020;141:
104871.
28. Goldman JS, Hahn SE, Catania JW, et al. Genetic counseling
and testing for alzheimer disease: Joint practice guidelines of
the American college of medical genetics and the national
society of genetic counselors. Genet Med . 2011;13(6):
597-605.
29. Dratch L, Owczarzak J, Mu W, et al. The lived experience of
reconstructing identity in response to genetic risk of fron-
totemporal degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
J Genet Couns . 2023.
30. Balendra R, Isaacs AM. C9orf72-mediated ALS and FTD:
multiple pathways to disease.
Nat Rev Neurol . 2018;14(9):
544-558.
31. Dane TL, Gill AL, Vieira FG, Denton KR. Reduced C9orf72
expression exacerbates polyGR toxicity in patient iPSC-
derived motor neurons and a Type I protein arginine
methyltransferase inhibitor reduces that toxicity. Front Cell
Neurosci. 2023:17. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
3389/fncel.2023.1134090 Accessed July 21, 2023.
32. Tran H, Moazami MP , Yang H, et al. Suppression of mutant
C9orf72 expression by a potent mixed backbone antisense
oligonucleotide. Nat Med . 2022;28(1):117-124.
33. Liu Y , Dodart JC, Tran H, et al. V ariant-selective stereopure
oligonucleotides protect against pathologies associated with
C9orf72-repeat expansion in preclinical models. Nat
Commun. 2021;12(1):847.
34. Zampatti S, Peconi C, Campopiano R, Gambardella S,
Caltagirone C, Giardina E C9orf72-Related neurodegener-
ative diseases: from clinical diagnosis to therapeutic strat-
egies. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 2022;14. https://
www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnagi.2022.907122
Accessed July 21, 2023.
35. Castelli LM, Lin Y -H, Sanchez-Martinez A, et al. A cell-
penetrant peptide blocking C9ORF72-repeat RNA nuclear
export reduces the neurotoxic effects of dipeptide repeat
proteins. Sci Transl Med . 2023;15(685):eabo3823.
36. Lopez-Herdoiza MB, Bauch ´eS ,W i l m e tB ,e ta l .
C9ORF72 knockdown triggers FTD-like symptoms and
cell pathology in mice. F r o n tC e l lN e u r o s c i. 2023;17:
1155929.
162 Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology 37(2)